Single
Programming
Document
2023-2025
EUROPEAN
UNION
AGENCY
FOR RAILWAYS

Manuscript completed in November 2022
Neither the Agency nor any person acting on behalfof the Agency is responsible for the use
Which might be made of the following information.
Luxembourg: Publications Offce of the European Union, 2022
PDF
ISBN 978-92-9477-427-9
doi:10.2821/018681
TR-05-22-33-EN-N
Photo credits: @ hxdyl (cover) Chalabala (page 13), krumanop (page 16)
APchanel (page 37), Negro Elkha (page 65) _
stockadobecom
European Union Agency for Railways; 2022
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. For any use or reproduction of individual
photos or illustrations; permission must be sought directly from the
copyright holders:

Contents
List of Tables
3
List ofacronyms
Foreword by the Executive Director
Mission statement
1. General context
13
1. Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
16
Multi-annual work programme 2023-2025 _
17
Structure ofthe multi-annual programme 2023-2025 _
Contentofthe multi-annual programme 2023-2025 
17
Human and fnancial resources
outlook forthe years 2023
2025
32
Overview ofthe past and current situation._
32
Outlook forthe years 2023
2025
33
Resource programming forthe years 2023
2025
34
Strategy for achieving efficiency gains.
34
Negative priorities _
decrease of existing tasks。
36
I. Annual Work programme 2023
37
Executive summary
38
Activities。
39
Strategic statement
There Will no longer be any technical and operational
barriers to the free movement of people and
by rail, assets can be reused throughout Europe:
39
Strategic statement 2 - Rail
Will
become
the
backbone that supports
an
environmentally
sustainable  multimodal
transport
system and wWill be favoured as a transport mode by
the new generations:。
45
Strategic statement 3 - Rail traffic will become seamless and Maas (Mobility
as
a Service) and Laas (Logistic as a Service)
be
ensured, including multi-leg ticketing:
45
Strategic statement 4 - Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure mode of
transport forits users and workers:
47
Strategic statement 5
Rail
Will
be
resilient and
in responding
to
emergency situations.
51
Strategic statement 6 - Railwillbecomeincreasinglyeconomicallycompetitive
aS a
mode and as a sector。
52
Strategic statement 7 -The EU will become the global reference for rail and
ERAauthorisations Will be globally recognised 54
Strategic statement 8
The Agency will
ensure
an
effective and efficient
governance Of its portfolio Of activities in order to
offerthe best value for money to citizens and business
in the EU _
57
Strategic statement 9 -The
Agency
Will
ensure
performant
working
environment
based
On
high-quality
motivated
human resources and a collaborative behaviour.
62
CONTENTS | 1
goods
will
agile

IV Annexes
65
Annex |.Organisational chart _
66
Annex Il. Resource allocation per activity 2023
2025
68
Annex Ill. Financial Resources 2023-2025
69
|1. Revenue_
69
「2. Expenditure.
71
「3. Budget outturn and cancellation ofappropriations .
75
Annex IV. Human Resources 2023-2025
quantitative 
76
/T4.Staff population and its evolution: overview ofall categories Of staff
76
「5. Multi-annual staff policy plan 2021-2025.
78
T6. Recruitment forecasts 2023 following retirementlmobility or new
requested posts
80
Annex V. Human Resources 2023-2025
qualitative _
8
A. Recruitment (engagement) policy -
8
Implementing rules in place _
8
B.Appraisal and reclassifcation
promotions.
84
Implementing rules in place _
84
C.Gender representation
88
D.Geographical balance。
89
E Schooling
Annex V.Environment management_
92
Executive summary。
92
ERAin the broader policy context related to environment.
92
Environmental impacts Of ERA activities _
95
Accountability ceiling Of ERA_
95
Environment management achievements of ERA to date _
96
Environment management initiatives and planned actions for 2023-2025.
97
Current status and plan for certifications and standards _
101
Annex VIl. Building policy.
02
Current building(s).
02
Building project in the planning phase。
103
Building projects submitted to the European Parliament and the Council . 103
Annex VIll. Privileges and immunities。
04
Annex IX. Evaluations。
06
Terminology: _
08
Annex X. Strategy for the organisational management and internal
control systems
09
Annex XI.Plan for grant; contribution, or service-level agreements -
12
Annex XI. Strategy for cooperation with third countries andlor
international organisations。
14
Annex XIII. Procurement plan.
15
Annex XIV. Strengthening Action Plan (SAP) 2023-2027 .
17
1. Context
17
2.What We want to achieve.
17
3. Objectives, actions, indicators, and targets.
18
4.Governance and monitoring arrangements
28
5. Risks。
128
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

List OfTables
Table 1
Human resources 2021-2023
32
Table 2
Revenues 2021-2023
32
Table 3 - Expenditure 2021-2023 _
33
Table 4
Financial resources
Outlook 2023-2025.
34
Table 5
Human resources
Outlook 2023-2025()
34
Table 6
Number of posts for each organisational entity (headcount)
67
Table 7
Resource allocation 2022
2025
68
Table 8 - Overview ofrevenues
69
Table 9 - General revenues
69
Table 10 - Overview on additional EU funding
70
Table 11
Additional EU funding: grant contribution and service-level
agreements_
70
Table 12
Expenditure。
71
Table 13
Commitment appropriations (EU contribution) 
72
Table 14
Commitment appropriations (Fees and charges) -
73
Table 15
Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations
75
Table 16
Establishment plan posts
76
Table 17
Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant
contribution or service-levelagreements _
77
Table 18 
Structural service providers。
77
Table 19 - Interim workers_
77
Table 20 - Temporary Agents。
78
Table 21
Contract Agents.
79
Table 22 -
Seconded National Experts _
79
Table 23
Recruitment forecast
80
Table 24
Implementing rules in place
81
Table 25
Implementing rules related to appraisal of performance and
reclassifcation
promotion_
84
Table 26
Reclassifcation of temporary staff。
85
Table 27
Reclassifcation of contract staff_
86
Table 28 -
Data on 01/09/2022
statutory staff only (offcials, TA and CA).
88
Table 29
Data regarding gender evolution over 5 years ofthe Middle and Senior
management.
89
Table 30 -
Data on 01/09/2022
statutory staff only (offcials, TA and CA).
89
Table 31
Evolution over 5 years of the most represented nationality in the
Agency.
Table 32
Schooling 
Table 33
Current building(s)
102
Table 34 - Privileges granted to staff _
04
Table 35
Grant, contributions; or service-level agreements
12
Table 36 -
New procurement procedures to be launched in 2023 _
115
Table 37
Planned use in 2023 of existing framework contracts.
116
CONTENTS

List ofacronyms
AD
Administrator
AMOCS
Acceptable Means of Compliance
AO
Authorising Officer
AOD
Authorising Officer by Delegation
ASLP
Assessment of Safety Level and Performance
AST
Assistant
ATO
Automatic Train Operations
BoA
Board of Appeal
CA
Contract Agent
CAAR
Consolidated Annual Activity Report
CCM
Change Control Management
CCS
Control Command and Signalling
CEOS
Conditions of Employment of Other Servants
COR
Common Occurrence Reporting
COVID-19
Coronavirus pandemic (SARS-CoV-2)
CSIs
Common Safety Indicators
CSMs
Common Safety Methods
CSTs
Common Safety Targets
CUI
Common User Interface
DAC
Digital Automatic Coupler
DG BUDG
Directorate-General for Budget
DGDIGIT
Directorate-General for Informatics
DGMOVE
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport
DG NEAR
Directorate-General for Neighbourhood and Enlargement
Negotiations
Dol
Declaration of Interest
EASA
European Union Aviation Safety Agency
EB
Executive Board
EC
European Commission
European Court of Auditors
ECM
Entity in Charge of Maintenance
EFTA
European Free Trade Association
EMSA
European Maritime Safety Agency
EPSO
European Personnel Selection Offce
ERA
European Union Agency for Railways
ERADIS
ERA Database on Interoperability and Safety
ERATV
European Register of Authorised Types ofVehicles
EU RailJU
Europes Rail Joint Undertaking
ERSAD
European Railway Stations Accessibility Database
ERTMS
European Rail Traffc Management System
ESG
Economic Steering Group
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
ECA

ESO
European Standardisation Organisation
ETCS
European Train Control System
EU
European Union
EUAN
EU Agencies Network
EUMedRail
EuroMed Rail Safety and Interoperability Project
EVR
European Vehicle Register
FFR
Framework Financial Regulation
FM
Facility Management
FRMCS
Future Railway Mobile Communication System
FTE
Full Time Equivalent
FWC
Framework Contract
GSMR
Global System for Mobile Communications (Railway)
HOF
Human and Organisational Factors
HQ
Headquarters
HR
Human Resources
IAS
Internal Audit Service ofthe Commission
ICC
Internal Control Coordinator
ICF
Internal Control Framework
ICT
Information and Communication Technologies
IM
Infrastructure Manager
IMS
Integrated Management System
INEA
The Innovation and Networks Executive Agency
IOA
Inventory Of Assets
IPA
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance
IRSC
International Railway Safety Council
ISO
International Organisation for Standardization
ISS
Information Sharing System
|
Information Technology
JNS
Joint Network Secretariat
J
Joint Undertaking
KPI
Performance Indicator
LaaS
Logistic as a Service
Maas
Mobility as a Service
MB
Management Board
MFF
Multiannual Financial Framework ofthe European Union
MS
Member State ofthe European Union
MT
ManagementTeam
NIB
National Investigation Body
NOBO
Notifed Body
NSA
National Safety Authority
NTRs
National Technical Rules
NVR
National Vehicle Register
OSJD
Organization for Co-operation between Railways
OSS
One-Stop Shop
OTIF
Organisation for International Carriage by Rail
POE
Poolof Experts
LISTOF ACRONYMS
Key

PM
Project Manager
PO
Project Owner
PR
Public Relation
PRM
Persons With reduced mobility
RASCOP
Rail Standardisation Coordination Platform
RBs
Recognition Bodies
RDD
Reference Document Database
EC Regulation
RFC
Rail Freight Corridors
RlINF
Registerof Infrastructures
RISC
Railway Interoperability and Safety Committee
RSD
Railway Safety Directive
RSG
Research Steering Group
RU
Railway Undertaking
SAIT
Safety Alert ITTool
SAP
Strengthening Action Plan 2023-2027
SCS
Safety Culture Survey
SERA
Single European Railway Area
SLA
Service Level Agreement
SM
Service Manager
SMS
Safety Management System
SNE
Seconded National Expert
S0
Service Owner
SP
Safety Performance
SPD
Single Programming Document
SRD
Single Rules Database
SSC
Single Safety Certifcate
TA
Temporary Agent
TA
Trackside Approvals
TAF
Telematics Applications for Freight
TAP
Telematics Applications for Passenger Services
TDG
Transport of Dangerous Goods
TSI
Technical Specifications for Interoperability
UfN
Union for the Mediterranean
UIC
International Union of Railways
VA
Vehicle Authorisation
VKM
Vehicle Keeper Marking
WBG
Western Balkans 6
WP
Work Programme
4RP
Fourth Railway Package
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Reg:

Foreword bythe
Executive Director
"A sustainable; safe European transport system without frontiers" not only repre-
sents our Agency's vision, but also reflects the unprecedented challenges that transport
in Europe is facing in the general pursuit ofthe green mobility goals, While also taking into
account the consequences ofthe COVID-19 pandemic. In a world that faces a resurgence
ofviolence and war; We witness
daythe strategic importance of railways. The trans-
port of critical supplies and of people to safety through railways in Ukraine is a testimony
tothe vital importance ofrail。
In line With its mandate; the European Union Agency for Railways aims at covering a wide
range ofareas of
involving actions to drive the continuation of the progress with
railway Safety and interoperability, together with its role Of EU-wide authority for Vehicle
Authorisation, Single Safety Certifcation, and ERTMS Trackside Approval.
The multi-annual work programme 2023-2025, together with the annual programme
2023 have been planned and drafted following the intervention logic principles; on
the basis ofthe conclusions ofthe SPD 2023 Workshop held with the Management Board
Josef Doppelbauer
in July 2021. Since 2022, the Agency's work has been organised around the agreed setof
SeVen
strategic statements, Which projects the Agency's role in relation to its stake-
holders; complemented by two transversal strategic statements, which capture the
Agency's governance and support functions。
In the third year after the transposition by all Member States ofthe 4th Railway Package
technical pillar, the Agency has gained signifcant experience in running the tasks re-
lated to the Authority role, as wellas in forecasting their volume to the best extent possi-
ble. Indeed, based on an analysis carried out on previous years' patterns; the Agency can
identify more accurately peak periods for the expected submission of applications, Which
are now reflected in its planning. In addition, the Agency has reached a higher maturity
level with the processing of authorisation and certifcation tasks, Which has a potential for
driving
higherefficiency in their delivery。
While the level of ambition and action for the Agency around the defned strategic state-
ments can be
high,asalso confrmed by the Management Board expectations during
the SPD 2023 workshop, the Agency has put in place a stronger mechanism ofinternalar-
bitration in order to identify priorities and put forward the expected outputs, Which can ft
Within the available envelope of budgetand human resources in order to ensure the best
Value for money forthe EU citizens. While the Agency's ambition is to affrm its increasingly
stronger position as the technical reference for the progress With railway interoperability
and safety in the EU,it had been faced with the challenge of deploying a too limited num-
ber of posts as compared to its needs to cope With the simultaneous pressure from the
policy and the authority tasks:
In 2022, the Agency's Management Board adopted the Strengthening Plan prepared
by the Agency in close cooperation with the European Commission. With the document
serving as a basis for the internal EC budget negotiations in 2022, the Agency received a
proposed increase of 12 temporary agent posts (TAs) starting 2023. While the additional
TA allocation is lower compared to the request from the Strengthening Plan (12 TAs pro-
posed out of the 22 TAs requested), it can Offer a
basis for the Agency to proceed
With the implementation ofthe Strengthening Plan. A
important challenge is repre-
sented by the fact that the additional TA allocation needs to be fully covered under the
existing budget envelope. To make best use ofthis TA allocation and considering the very
FOREWORD BYTHE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
every
WOrk
Very
good
Very

likely high budget pressure related to the indexation of salaries and prices; the Agency is
makingathorough assessment ofits capacity to coverthese costs in a sustainable manner
until the end ofMFF 2021-2027. Several measures are envisaged, such as the time-phased
hiring of the TAs. The budget constraint on the subsidy side is an element to be properly
monitored and managed for the remaining period of the current MFF especially in the
context ofthe
challenging and volatile context of salary and price indexation, started
in 2022.The SPD 2023 displays the assignment of these additional posts to the priority
areas identifed in the Strengthening Plan and factors
prudent approach by means of
a correction coefficient for late hiring during the year. Additionally, the Agency is making
sustained efforts for a combined response to the resourcing challenge by increasing the
direct utilisation ofits resources, both in terms of budget and FTEs。
The Agency keeps a strong commitmentto deploying the necessary resources for meet-
ingthe legal deadlines forthe issuing OfVA, SSC and ERTMS Trackside approvals; While also
respecting the deadlines for its safety and interoperability related activities, allof which
contribute to the achievement ofthe high-level policy objectives ofthe 4th Railway Pack-
age. The decision time linked to the authority tasks has undeniably a tremendous impact
on the rail stakeholders and on the competitiveness of rail compared with other sectors:
The Agency would also like to bring forward interesting and new projects that could
benefit the entire rail sector. We would like to develop a new safety information sharing
toolin the context of the CSMon the assessment of Safety Levels and Safety Performance;
including occurrence reporting: This activity Will involve
budgetary need to build the
tOol
as Well as an ongoing resource need to run the tool
tO
perform an analysis and
generate learning at European level, which is the ultimate added value. This task is a clear
example of a new legal obligation for which the Agency would need to receive an addi-
tional dedicated budget envelope:
Would like to assure the members Of the Management Board that the Agency Will con-
tinue to implement the mechanism already put in place fora regular monitoring ofthe
SpDimplementation in terms of outputs delivery and resource consumption, as Wellas
ofthe Strengthening Action Plan. The Agency Will also continue to improve the set of
budget execution monitoring actions already put in place starting 2021 to make best use
ofthe available budget appropriations. Furthermore;
Will also pay close attention to the
productivity ofthe Agency, ensuring it remains at a high-level. The Agency will strengthen
its tools to better plan; monitor and report So as to continuously increase its data-driv-
en, transparent working culture. For instance; the Agency's data-driven dashboard, which
supports all planning and monitoring decisions; is defnitely a step in the right direction。
In addition, more efforts will be produced to achieve more With less resources; as Well
a5
ensuring that the processes within the Agency are streamlined to deliver high-quality
results toallour stakeholders。
The Agency will continue to work closely with its stakeholders in order to ensure the SUC-
cessful implementation ofthis challenging multi-annual programme. The activities of the
Agency are crucial for contributing to the achievement of a signifcant modal shift to rail
in particular by helping to create and manage a Single European Rail Area,and to contin-
Uously improve railway Safety in Europe. At the same time; we Will continue our efforts to
progress towards
a culture of collaboration in the Agency。
Would like to thank the ERA
staffand allour stakeholders for their dedication and support that
am sure Will continue
for the years to come; as we will work towards an improved European transport system,
multimodal in nature; With rail as its backbone; eventually
beneftting from
fully func-
tioning Single European Railway Area.
Josef Doppelbauer
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Very

Mission statement
The updated vision and mission statements ofthe Agency ("A sustainable, safe European
transport system without frontiers" and "Moving Europe towards
sustainable and safe
railway system Without frontiers" respectively) were defned in 2021, following intense
work carried out through the organisational culture change (Better Together) project; with
the explicit aim to have full staff buy-in. The new mission and vision statements Of the
Agency better reflect its current position and role; While of course remaining fully in line
With the legal mandate ofthe Agency。
The Agency contributes to the further development and effective functioning ofa Single
European Railway Area without frontiers, by guaranteeing a high levelofrailway safety
and interoperability, While improving the competitive position ofthe railway sector, as
envisaged bythe Agency Regulation 2016/796. In particular; the Agency shall contribute;
on technical matters; to the implementation of Union legislation by developing a com-
mon
approach to safety on the Union rail system and by enhancing the level of interoper-
ability on the Union rail system and associated data, with a specifc focus on facilitating the
interoperable deployment of ERTMS and on access to data for pushing rail modernisation
and digitalisation. By working in close cooperation with the national authorities acting in
the felds of railway safety and interoperability, the Agency will substantially contribute
to an increased competitiveness ofrail and to the seamless cross-border traffic in the EU.
Moreover; through timely delivery of appropriate regulation that reflects the harmonised
and validated solution proposals from the Europes Rail Joint Undertaking, the Agency
contributes signifcantly to the coordinated and
deployment of such solutions; thus
strengthening the competitiveness Of rail in the transport mix。
AIIthese elements are
translated into rail becoming more attractive and affordable for passengers and freight
With the Agency playing an active role in supporting the delivery of the European Green
Deal for the EU citizens and businesses。
Vision statement
Mission statement
A sustainable; safe European transport system
Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe
without frontiers
railway system Without frontiers
To foster its mission; the Agency has identifed the following fundamentals (F) and ena-
blers (E):
MISSION STATEMENT
rapid

Mission statement
ERA Fundamentals: Attributes
Sociallyand
Understand
F1.3
environmentally
F2.3
transport system
F3.3
Fairness and respect
F4.3
Transparency
responsible organization
complexity
AILour decisions are determined to
We acknowledge and take into
Our decisions are made with
We defne our priorities and monitor
serve the common
andthe
account the legacy ofthe EU rail
impartiality, integrity and objectivity:
them in atransparent manner。
public interest。
system the complexity ofthe
Our
loyalty to the organisation and
We evaluate the effects ofall OUr
interactions between the Various
each otheris essential to achieVe OUr
actions on staffand stakeholders。
modes oftransport and levels of
mission. We resolve conflicts based
This serves
as input to drive future
decision.
on mutual respect.
improvement:
Looking for excellence
F1.2
Data Driven Organisation
F2.2
Learn from experience
F3.2
F4.2
Sustainable activities
in its diversity
Our collaborative analysis supports
We are looking for learning
We Value the
diversity Ofour
In the allocation of resources, we
decisions based on objective data。
opportunities internally and with
team and encourage a supportive
primarily consider ERA's priorities
external partners. We learn from errors
cooperation amongall
without
While caring for the We
llbeing
ratherthan to blame. We see feedback
distinction striving for excellence
Off staffand the impact on the
aS a Way to
improve our performance:
stakeholders。
F1.1
Mission driven organization
F2.1
Customer's needs
F3.1
Trust and pride
F4.1
Performance
We areall aware Of ERA's mission
We continuously analyse Who are
ERAis a
place to Work with a
We adopt an innovative spirit con-
and we are committed to support
OUr directand indirect stakehold-
strong sense of belonging; pride and
sidering rules as a tooland notan
togetherthe achievement ofour
ers and their needs. We adopt an
fulflment
objective. We reward performance
business objectives。
exploratory and impartial attitude to
atall levels_
propose measures for their prob-
lems, needs and opportunities。
Build a sustainable
Understand the transport
Work all together
Monitor our contribution
and safe European
and
mobility reality
as ateam
to the railway system
transport system
Fl
F2
F3
F4
10
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
good
Staff
good

Organisational cultural enablers: Attributes
E1
E2
[3
E4
INTERACTING
FORMALISING
DISSEMINATING
REINFORCING
Teamwork
Roles
E1.1
E2.1
[3.1
Communication
E4.1
Leading by example
and collaboration
and responsibilities
Collaboration within and across
Roles, responsibilities and authorities
Information is openly shared within
Managers exhibit behaviours that
organisations is nurtured.
are understood and accepted.
and across organisations。
set the standard.
E1.2
Interpersonal values
[2.2
Organisational design
E3.2
Competence management
[4.2
Management intervention
Trust; respect and openness perme-
Organisational structures support
Competence management ensures
Managers ensure that incentives
ate the organisation and character-
theachievement of missionand
knowledgeable workforce.
sanctions and recognition reinforce
ise inter-organisational relationships
organisational excellence。
behaviours and outcomes that
atall leVels。
support the achievement of mission
and organisational excellence:
E1.3
Regulatory relationships
[2.3
Organisational systems
[3.3
Soft skills
E43
HOF expertise
Healthy regulatory relationships exist
Processes, tools and documentation
Leadership and non-technical skills
Human and organisational factors,
and ensure that the accountability
support the achievement of mission
are
systematically developed。
including frontline experience; are
remains With the Agency
and organisational excellence:
systematically considered during
designand change:
MISSION STATEMENT
11

Through its mission and actions, the Agency is committed to contribute to the EC Political
guidelines:
European Green Deal
an economy that works for people
Europe ft forthe digital age
stronger Europein the world
The Agency will support the EC agenda to ensure sustainable; safe, affordable; and acces-
sible transport and to strengthen railways' role in the transport mix, in line with its mission
and mandate。
12
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

General context

Transportis an essential part ofthe European integration, especially given its contribution
to the
functioning of the free movement of services, goods; and people. Transport also
represents around 59 of the EU GDP and directly employs around 10 million workers(),
therefore representing an important sector for society at large. EU transport policies have
been developed according tothe
principles ofsafety, sustainability, resilience; connec-
tivity, and efficiency。
Through its long-term vision for the transport sector and European society, the European
Commission published in 2020 the Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy with a detailed
action plan of 82 initiatives. With this strategy, the Commission presents how the EU trans-
port system Will achieve its needed green and digital transformation and become more
resilient_
As outlined in the European Green Deal the result will be a 909 cut in carbon
emissions by 2050. Regarding the rail sector; the following targets have been set:
Traffic on high-speed rail will double by 2030
Rail freight traffic Will increase by 509 by 2030 and double by 2050
By 2030, rail and waterborne-based intermodal transport will be able to compete
on equal footing With road-only transport in the EU
The European Union Agency for Railways will support the European Commission, in line
with its accountability ceiling, in achieving these goals; in particular through the further
development and effective functioning of a Single European Railway Area Without fron-
tiers。
The 2023-2025 programming period for the Agency involves two different types of activ-
ities:
The policy tasks contributing to the implementation of Union legislation by de-
veloping
a common
approach to Safety on the Union rail system and by enhanc-
ing the level of interoperability on the Union rail system, taking into account the
policy priorities identifed in the Strengthening Plan 2023-2027,as endorsed by
the Agency's Management Board in 2022.
The
full-fledged performance of the Agency's tasks as EU-wide authority for
safety certifcation;, vehicle authorisation and ERTMS trackside approval, along with
othertasks in the field of railway safety and interoperability as foreseen in the Tech-
nical Pillar ofthe Fourth Railway Package:
The Agency has been implementingan innovative structure to its work programme; Which
responds to the intervention logic requirements, in line with the guidelines provided by
the Network Of EU Agencies. It also strives to increase its efficiency in delivering the out-
comes and impacts expected by EU citizens. In light ofthe above; the Work programme of
the Agency (in its multi-annualand annual planning) is organised around seven strategic
statements, Which project the Agency s role in relation to its stakeholders, complement
ed by two transversal strategic statements; Which capture the Agency's governance and
support functions. These strategic statements were adopted by the MB forSPD 2022-2024
and are extremely important; as they show the direction of travel on Which the Agency
plans to embark in order to make railways work better for society, subject to its remit and
accountability ceiling. The concrete Agency work represented by projects and services
with concrete outputs; is organised by grouping the projects and services which together
can contribute to the outcomes and impacts stated in a particular strategic statement:
In SPD 2023, the Agency has further implemented the intervention logic. While for the
previous years the multiannual section was presented mainly with overarching objectives
to achieve; the planning will now include more detailed FTEs and budget fgures. This
additional level of granularity will provide more reliable data to monitor and
coherent
stability for the Agency. Of course; the Agency will remain flexible and redeploy resources
https://ec.europa.eu/commission /presscorner/detaillen/fs_ 20_2350
14
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
key

i needed, but the new approach provides
roadmap for all stakeholders regarding the
areas on Which the Agency will focus in the next three years。
The current SPD 2023 draft proposes the implementation of the objectives detailed in
the Strengthening Plan by increasing the level of ambition for specifc priority areas With
the Agency's intention to make best use of the 12 additional TAs for this purpose; While
tackling the challenge of embedding those additional resources in the existing budget
envelope. Several measures are envisaged, such as the time-phased hiring ofthe TAs.
The SPD 2023 draft budget and related establishment plan have been developed taking
into account the following elements:
The EC draft budget for 2023, proposing 12 additional TAs to the Agencyin line
With the policy priorities identifed in the Strengthening Plan, translated into
dedicated implementation document
the Strengthening Action Plan (SAP)
2023-2027, which represents an anchor for the current and the subsequent
SPDs;
A cautious approach for
embedding the 12 TAs in the work allocation for 2023
by means of applying
a correction coeffcient for late/phased hiring during
the year;
The exceptional salary indexation foreseen for 2022 and 2023, including the
additional funding provided by the European Commission for 2023 to tackle
partially this matter;
refned estimate ofthe fees and charges evolution, including an estimate on
the volume ofwork; on one hand,and the indexation ofthe hourly rate on the
other hand, in line With the provisions ofthe Implementing Regulation。
When it comes to the resources; 2023 also marks the frst full year where the updated
hourly rate (from E130 to E239) will be applied by the Agency. In addition to recovering
the direct costs linked to the processing ofthe OSS
applications, the Agency also calcu-
lates and recovers a pro rata share ofthe costs for support activities/costs linked to the fees
and charges activities. In particular for 2023, the Agency forecast of revenues from the fees
and
charges also envisages an assumption on the indexation, as per the provisions from
the Implementing Regulation in force:
The Agency will pay signifcant attention to a regular monitoring of the SPD implemen-
tation in terms of outputs, resource consumption and revenues, Which can allow for agile
responses and possible adaptation Of its Work programme. The Agency Will continue to
WOrK
together with the poolofexperts forthe mutual beneft ofthe cooperation between
the Agency and the NSAs. This cooperation may also help the Agency to tackle capacity
shortages, as wellas language skills gaps. In addition, the Agency will strive for contin-
uously improving its efficiency in delivering the expected outputs; as Well as its overall
performance in contributing to the expected outcomes and impacts:
GENERAL CONTEXT
15

I. Multi-annual programming
2023-2025
=
TOOO
Engineer
Daigram
Since
2020-2032

Multi-annual work programme 2023-2025
Structure ofthe multi-annual programme 2023-2025
The structure ofthe Agency's multi-annual work programme is organised according to
strategic statements:
Strategic Statement
There will no longer be any technical and operational
barriers to the
movement of people and goods by rail, assets can be reused
throughout Europe:
Strategic Statement 2
Rail will become the backbone that supports an envi-
ronmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will be favoured as
transport mode by the new generations:
Strategic Statement 3
Rail traffc will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as
Service)and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will be ensured, including multi-leg tick-
eting:
Strategic Statement 4
Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure mode of
transport for its users and workers
Strategic Statement 5 - Rail will be resilient and agile in responding to emergen-
situations。
Strategic Statement 6 -
Rail will become increasingly economically competitive
asa mode and as a sector
Strategic Statement 7
The EU will become the global reference for railand ERA
authorisations will be globally recognised:
Strategic Statement 8
The Agency Will ensure an effective and efficient gov-
ernance Of its portfolio of activities in order to offer the best value for money to
citizens and business in the EU
Strategic Statement 9
The Agency Willensure
performant working environ-
ment; based on high quality motivated resources and a collaborative behaviour。
It should be noted that these strategic statements are long-term objectives ofthe Agency
and as SUch it is not foreseen that
they willall be achieved by 2025.
In addition, it should be noted that the arbitration exercise for the year 2023 was further
developed and intensifed. Indeed, it followed the key principles and areas Of priorities de-
tailed in the endorsed Strengthening Plan and further detailed as part Of SAP 2023-2027.
In addition, the Agency prioritised through the identifcation of the anticipated added
Value Of activities; as well as their potential contribution towards the desired outcomes。
The Agency followed
a data-driven
approach looking at previous years resource con-
sumption, as Wellas the deliverables description for each project _
Service。
Content of the multi-annual programme 2023-2025
Forits 2023-2025 work programme; the
Agency takes into account the possible Ways of
balancing the demand for its authority Work on one hand and the ambition level for the
priority areas detailed in the Strengthening Plan, on the other hand. The authorisations;
certifcates and approvals issued by the Agency have a direct impact on the functioning
Ofthe rail sectorand
bring much added value in terms of safety and interoperability: In
addition, the strategic role in policy development; research and innovation; and advice
provided by the Agency is recognised as highly important and should continue to be
strengthened. It is equally important to highlight the possible role of the Agency to mon-
itor and support the adequate implementation of the existing legal framework through
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
17
free

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
harmonised level of maturity both at the levels of operators and national authorities。
To make its operations always more efficient and effective; the Agency will continue to
implement to its full extent the continuous improvement approach to its project man-
agement and make sure that its resources are deployed in those activities Where it can
have the highest impact and added value for the railway sector and the EU citizens The
Agency will continue to develop its workstream on cybersecurity and will liaise With ENISA
to explore future scope for cooperation.
The breakdown of FTEand budget distribution by Strategic Statement overthe 2022-2025
period are shown in the following charts。
Figure 1: FTE distribution
2025
2024
2023
2022
20
40
60
80
100
Ststl
Stst2&3
Stst4
Ststs
Stst6
Stst7
Ststg
Ststg
Figure 2: Budget distribution by Strategic Statement (E)
2025
2024
2023
2022
000 000
2000000
3000 000
4000 000
Ststl
Stst2&3
Stst4
Ststs
Stst6
Stst7
Ststg
Ststg
18
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Resource constraints experienced in 2021,and partially in 2022, under this strategic state-
ment Were
a Serious
challenge to the Agencys raison detre. Nevertheless, despite the
Strategic Statement 1
diffcult context, the Agency has consolidated its position as European authority for rail
thanks to its excellent reputation; both in technical terms and in the customer service
There will no longer be
approach。
technical and operational barriers
tothe free movement of people
In the feld of Railway Interoperability, the Agency has identifed 6 intermediate outcomes
and goods by rail, assets can be
that it can actively influence through its portfolio Of TSIs, ERTMS, National rules, and
reused throughout Europe:
isters Services
are essential components; which
lead to the achievement ofthe
strategic statement. The already identifed intermediate outcomes are as follows:
1. ERTMS is fully implemented on rolling stock by all Railway Undertakings
2. ERTMS is
implemented on railway infrastructure by all Infrastructure Managers
3.AlIrailway rolling stock is TSI (Technical Specifications for Interoperability) compliant
byall RUs across the EU.(exc. TAP/TAF & OPE)
4.All
railway infrastructure is TSI (Technical Specifcations for Interoperability) compli-
ant byall IMs across the EU
5. National rules (rolling stock & fxed installation) are harmonised across the EU
6.AIIrelevant railway-related data is shared in an open and transparent Way so that it
is utilisable and useful
the sector
Ofcourse; this list will continue to be elaborated in the future to include other intermedi-
ate outcomes, as the Agency continues to pursue its full implementation ofthe interven-
tion logic。
From the perspective of its position of authority for delivering vehicle authorisations; sin-
gle safety certifcates and ERTMS trackside approvals; the Agency will continue in the pe-
riod 2023-2025 to drive further the harmonisation towards the Single European Railway
Area, ensuring the path towards technical and operational interoperability. The Agency's
input to the work on the System Pillar Will support harmonisation。
The stability ofthe TSIs, together with a successful cleaning up ofthe national rules are the
foundation of seamless operations across Europe and for an increasingly effective
authority function, reinforcing the advantage of having a European mindset in the EU
railway System. The year 2023 will mark the completion of the
cleaning Up exercise Of
the national technical, safety; operational rules as well as rules on fxed installations and
ERTMS. This cleaning-up is an important step towards delivering a truly harmonised EU
rail system. The Agency will continue to focus on the removal of redundant national rules
(operational and technical), the harmonisation of the remaining rules and the develop-
ment Of AMOCs. Therefore; the agency plans, in line with the priorities identifed in the
Strengthening Plan, to:
Finalise the VA NRs cleaning-upin 2022, within the framework ofunique authoriza-
tion for coaches; the inclusion ofremaining cleaned VA NRs into the TSIs is planned,
Finalise the NSR cleaning-up in 2022 and to build activities from 2023 onwards on
the newly to be developed "NSR assessment framework"
Moreover; in 2023, the Agency and the EC are putting together a practical implementa-
tion plan to address the acknowledged need for harmonisation in assessing and cleaning
allthe categories Of rules (vehicle, Fl, safety/operational. Once agreed, the milestones of
this plan will be reflected in an update ofthe indicators for SAP 2023-2027 and SPD 2024,
respectively。
The Agency will also continue to deliver its role as sole body responsible for issuing mul-
ti-Member-State authorisations, certifcations; and approvals. The Agency will continue
performing its tasks in full partnership with the NSAs. In addition, the links between au-
thorisation, certifcations, and approvals by the Agency and the supervision by the NSAs
Willbe
strengthened。
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
19
any
Reg-
will
They
fully
foI

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
The lessons learnt through the issuing Of VAs, ERTMS trackside approvals and from the
monitoring of NoBos will be used to capture continuous improvement opportunities for
the technical specifcations and to the authorization procedures. The experience in issuing
safety certifcates will be used to better steer the safety related policy making, so railway
safety Will never be used again as a barrier. More specifcally, the work on NoBo monitoring
will be reinforced in 2023, With additional resources dedicated to this activity, in line with
the direction given in the Strengthening Plan。
Seamless operations also mean exchanging data, a process on which the Agency Willcon-
tinue to contribute by facilitating the data exchange for, among various purposes, author-
ization, registration, and route compatibility checks; based on the linked data approach。
In relation to future developments of the Agency's role and of the railway system the
Agency Will continue to identify new needs and related research matters。
The Agency Willalso assess mature innovation products; with a clear potential for market
uptake.
In this context; the Agency Will focus on exploring emerging needs such as:
Better coordination of traffic management EU-wide; including, but not limited to,
planning, capacity management; and emergency responses
Increased and improved offer for passengers and freight in the railway sector
Improved operations through the adoption of automatic translation systems and
training for operators in their native language. This would enhance the railway SYyS-
tems resilience to interoperability issues and increase cross-border traffic。
The objective is to make the railway system more resilient to interoperability issues and
increase the cross-border traffic:
Related to interoperability, after its further evolutions introduced via the TSI 2022 pack-
age revision (i.e.,ATO, FRMCS optimisation of braking curves, digital coupling, transitions,
combined transport; etc) the Agency will ensure stability in the established technical re-
quirements including ERTMS. After the introduction of FRMCS readiness in CCS TSI 2022,
the focus for 2023-2025 will be on the production ofthe fullset ofspecifications for FRMCS.
The roadmap for the introduction of these specifcations in the CCS TSI will be set-up. For
the further evolution ofthe on-board modularity and the advanced train positioning We
will take the inputs from System Pillar in our CCM process to prepare for the update ofthe
CCSTSIaccordingly:
In addition, a further harmonisation through TSIs will focus on telematics, security aspects;
national rules harmonisation and innovations such as digital automatic couplers (DAC) fa-
cilitating the shunting of freight wagons, new materials, new on-board sources of energy
based on the results provided by the System Pillar work。
The service 'Management of Innovation and long-term evolution of the Agency; intro-
duced in 2021, Will continue to steer the research & innovation policy ofthe Agency and
its future development. It will also be in charge of coordinating the Agencys input to the
workon the System Pillar The Agency Will ensure technical assistance to the Commission
a5
guardian ofinteroperability and Safety, and as system authority for ERTMS & telematics:
This will boost harmonisation of operations; subsystems; and components; leaving the
practical aspects to the industry, assuming an appropriate level of oversight. In parallel
the Agency will continue to identify related research needs and assess mature innovation
products, with a clear potential for market uptake, in order to reflect them into the techni-
cal specifcations This work will however be carried out at a slower pace; due to budgetary
Constraints_
20
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Performance Indicators
Key Performance Indicator
Target 
National Rules
1009 cleaned and published in SRD
2
Dissemination on TSIs
workshops organised
CCS TSI - Maintenance and operational activities for CCS Framework
Publication of CCS TSI Application
guide/ESC-RSC tests
No.of reports for NoBos audit/inspection sent to NoBos for comments after
At least 9 reports
the onsite Visit
5
Registers related service requests by customers processed (reply provided to
Within 10 working days, as determined
customer)
in the service level agreement
Issuing Approvals
Proportion of decisions taken according to the legal
1009
framework deadlines
Issuing Vehicle Authorisation, including ERTMS on-board assessments
1009
Proportion ofdecisions taken according to the legal framework deadlines (for
completeness and assessment phases)
Outcome indicators
Harmonisation and reduction of Member-State specifc National rules (both national safety rules and national
technical rules) via a Single Rules Database:
2
Number of international passenger/freight trains at selected border stations (interoperability reports)
3
Number of hours spent at cross-border operations
ERTMS trackside deploymentin the EU
Vehicles equipped with ERTMs in the EU
Number of open type 3 issues When issuing VA and TA/ overall numberof certifcates issued
Number ofVA and TA issued with reduced validity period/ overall number of certifcates issued
Number of data consumption of registers
Resource
envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTEs
77.63
82.02
80.42
Budget()
2,246,463
2,300,621
2,387,211
This number includes the POE and NSA costs for fees and charges activities on ERTMS TA and Vehicle authorisa-
tions
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
21
Key

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
The Agency is playing
pivotal role in supporting the transformation ofthe European
Strategic Statement 2 &3
transport system towards decarbonised, interoperable and safe transport modes based
on multi-modal integration (Maas).
2 Rail will become the backbone
that supports an environmentally
In 2022,the Agency provided substantial inputs to the Green Deal deliverables and played
sustainable multimodal transport
a key role for driving the data and digitalisation agenda for railways, based on the linked
system and will be favoured as
data pilots and the revision of TAPTTAF TSI. Those elements are particularly relevant in
transport mode by the new
multi-modal context as
they enable that integration in terms of ticketing and timetables
generation
Which has been preventing the effective development of rail as the backbone ofa mul-
ti-modaland international transport
3 Rail traffc will become seamless
and Maas (Mobility as a Service)
The Agency has identifed for this Strategic Statement two intermediate outcomes; Which
and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will
Willsupport the achievement ofthe overarching statement. There are the following ones:
be ensured
including multi-leg
1.TAP is implemented by all relevant railway actors (IMs, RUs, ticket vendors), it is ac-
ticketing
tually used as the main channel of information exchange and the ticketing is inte-
grated in the multimodal environment with other transport modes
2.TAFis implemented byall relevant railway actors (IMs, RUs, WKs; CTOs) and it is actu-
ally used as the main channel of information exchange
Ofcourse; TAF and TAP TSI will also be in scope for some intermediate outcomes already
identifed under strategic statement
1. Additional intermediate outcomes will be identi-
fied in the future to further implement the intervention logic within the Agency:
Forthe period 2023-2025, the Agency will still be a top player in ensuring the right frame-
work forthe data and information exchange related to assets and services (includ-
ing ticketing data), based on linked data, universal data identifiers and
more and better
data exchanged between operators and customers. This Will ensure a seamless exchange
Of data with other modes Of transport; thus allowing the customers to benefit from
comprehensive logistics chain orthe mobility-as-a-service; respectively. In addition; the
Agency has triggered its path to convert the EU Railway Registers in building blocks within
the European Common
Mobility Data Space (item 71). In 2020-2022, the Agency trans-
formed and linked together the Register of EU railway infrastructure (RINF) dataset and
the European Type of Vehicle (ERATV partly) dataset into a Knowledge graph (~26 million
triples), making this data interoperable, fndable; and providing semantically enriched
machine and human query services The Agency has followed the Directive 2019/1024on
open data, the EU data strategy, the Data Act -FAIR principles;, the principle of technology
neutrality- and the EU policy on reference data. Moreover, the Agency is a publisherin the
open data portal, With 13 datasets published. The data and digitalization roadmap 2021-
2024 proposes to add gradually new datasets (in-house data) to this knowledge graph
as Wellas links to external datasets to facilitate multimodal data exchange. Currently, the
Agency is developing the strategic direction for linked data in relation to RINF under stra-
tegic statement 8, while exploring the mainstreaming ofthis approach to other registers
and databases. Once moved from a strategic development concept to
mainstreamed
approach; this stream of work will be covered under strategic statement 2 and 3. In addi-
tion; the TAF TSI will provide the data communication requirements for the transparent
and effcient traffic management and train operations system of the future including also
first and last mile logistic segments involving intermodal actors (operators; terminals)
and (ii)
linkage to other modes of transport (road, waterborne) This Will also contain the
enhanced simple and smart tracking oftrains, wagons and consignments: The same TSI
willalso include additional requirements for the setting Up Of Laas starting from consign-
ment order (intermodal compliant), train operation preparation and ending in well-pre-
dicted
efficient delivery oftrains, wagons and consignments to the business partners。
Concerning the environmental sustainability of the railway system, the Agency Will con-
tinue to deliver support and assistance tothe EC forthe Green Deal; as wellas for the co-
ordination of transport of dangerous
by rail; recognising that in many cases
the Commission has the lead role。
22
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
goods

I additional budget and
resources become available in 2023, these Would allow the
Agency to work on the identifcation of bottlenecks, opportunities, and areas for
improvement to foster a coordinated traffc management at EU level.All this is a
pre-condition to further increase the reliability and timeliness Of railway services. Other
emerging areas in Which the Agency could play an active role include the definition of
the technical specifcations for hubs, terminals, nodes for intermodal shifts, the
specifcations for level crossings, and combined transport。
Performance Indicators
Performance Indicator
Target 
Monitoring ofthe TAP/TAFTSIimplementation
progress report on Year
02
Outcome indicators
The level of implementation Of TAF and TAP TSIas monitored through the annual "Safety and Interoperability Pro-
gress Report"
2
Evolution in share ofrail (both passengerand freight) in the EUs transport market compared to air, road or maritime
transport
3
GHG emission from rail compared with other transport modes (shares %
Resource envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTES
3.56
3.56
3.56
Budget
93,688
48,688
48,688
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
23
Key
Key

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
In the feld of Railway Safety, the Agency has identifed 3 categories of intermediate out-
Strategic Statement 4
comes that it can actively influence through its portfolio of safety related projects and
services and that are essential pre-conditions to achieve the strategic statement 4. The
Rail will be an increasingly safe and
identifed intermediate outcomes are as follows:
Secure mode oftransport forits
Users and Workers
1.AlIrailway operators
IM RU ECM
understand and accept their responsibility and
actively implement an SMS to control the risks of operational activities;
2.An increased performance ofand trust in the different safety related control levels in
the system
ERA, MS, NSA, ASBO, ECM CB,accreditation, recognition, NIB;
3. Safety and safety managementlperformance related data is shared in an open and
transparent Way;
The Agency can influence the positive progress towards the achievement of these out-
comes by intervening in the following 5 ways:
Building knowledge: to build ERA/sector knowledge on how to achieve the de-
sired outcome;
Regulating: providing the input to regulate Via EU legislation the desired out-
comes;
Sharing knowledge: to share knowledge on how to achieve the desired out-
comes;
Monitoring: to monitor the actual status of achieving the desired outcomes and
understanding the diffculties the sector is encountering;
Reinforcing: to enforce/reinforce the actual status of achieving the desired out-
Comes
Up until now the Agency has invested most ofits efforts in building knowledge and pro-
viding the input for regulating, While not suffciently supporting the railway sector in the
actual
implementation of the legislative framework The following years of the Agencys
work programme
focus more on the actual implementation by supporting the sector
through knowledge sharing, by better understanding the issues the sector is facing When
implementing the legislative framework by reinforcing the expected outcome where
possible and enforcing it Where necessary. Within this framework of intermediate out
comes and interventions for statement 4 the Agency will continue to focus on:
1 .
Supporting Member States in developing, adopting and repealing national legis-
lation and strengthening NSAs'and NIBs' capacity, in line with principles and legal
acts promoted by the EU. (sharing knowledge/ monitoring/ reinforcing)
Enhancing railway Safety through positive Safety culture and integration of
human and organisational factors and on the harmonisation of the safety
approach; partly through SSC applications. (sharing knowledge/ monitoring/
reinforcing)
3. Monitoring of NSAs and the follow-up of issues emerged during the Ist
Of
audits (monitoring
reinforcing)
Learning lessons through the issuing Of SSCs, the monitoring of NSAs, the review
Of NIB accident investigation reports and the information exchanged during
NSAand NIB meetings and meetings organised with the AsBos, this Will be used to
continuously improve the common safety methods, as wellas the safety certifca-
tion procedures (knowledge building/ sharing knowledge _
monitoring)
5. Strengthening the culture Of risk management to identify risks and mitigating
measures but also
opportunities to improve the efficiency of operations preserv-
ing the safety level. This shall cover well-known operational scenarios, including
interfaces with other transport modes, and the adoption of emerging technology
and related relevant risks
cyber security, etc ). (knowledge building/ sharing
knowledge)
24
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
will
Cycle
(e.9.

5.
Improving the structure; quality, and availability Of safety relevant data While
making sure it is shared in an open and transparent way among all railway actors_
(knowledge building/ monitoring):
If more resources are made available;, the capacity Of the Agency to monitor and re-en-
force the adequate functioning ofthe different safety control layers in the system could be
enhanced as Wellas the possibility ofthe Agency to support the stakeholders, atall levels;
for adequately implementing the existing framework。
Performance Indicators
Key Performance Indicator
Target
No.ofaudit reports sent to NSA for comments after the onsite Visit
At least 6
2
Feedback to NIBs provided on request
1009
3
Issuing Single Safety Certificates
Proportion of decisions taken accord-
1009
ing to the legal framework deadlines (for completeness and assessment
phases)
Outcomeindicator
Numberof open type 3 issues When issuing SSC's/ overall numberof certifcates issued
2
Numberof SSC's issued with reduced validity period/ overall numberof certificates issued
Number of appeals made by operators in a year linked to SSC certifcation/ average number of SSC's issued per
year
Percentage Of NSAs audited with at least
deficiency (focused on deficiencies still open from the 1st cycle). Note:
this is arolling indicator
NSA Monitoring: number of defciencies still open (follow-up ofthe 1st
Vs numberof deficiencies ofthe 1st
cycle (rolling indicator) Note: this is a rolling indicator
Number of peer reviewed NIB's
Number ofvolunteering NIBs to participate in the NIB peer review/ total number of NIB's (on a yearly basis)
Resource envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTEs
27,60
29.23
2803
BudgetR)
868,353
878,022
875,722
This number includes the POE and NSA costs for fees and charges activities on SSC.
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
25
Key
Cycle)

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
The Agency is currently reviewing the strategic statement 5, especially as no projects has
Strategic Statement 5
been identifed yet for the next three
Rail will be resilient and agile
Performance Indicators
in
responding to emergency
Key Performance Indicator
Target 
Situations
No KPI foreseen
pm
Outcomeindicators
No outcome indicator foreseen
Resource
envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTEs
Budget
E0
26
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
years。
Key

The Agency will endeavour to make sure that the rules and system specifications are
smart; proportionate and contribute to the competitiveness of the industry: It will also
Strategic Statement6
make sure that the SSC, VA, and ERTMS TA processes are cost and time effcient, fostering
the entrance ofnew operators in the market.
Rail will become increasingly
economically competitive as a
As presented in previous strategic statements, the agency aims at evaluating the eco-
modeand as a sector
nomic impact of the vehicle authorisation and issuing of single safety certifcate
processes on the railway sector the impact ofthe TSIs as a package, of market open
ing and competition and of modular interchangeability in the ERTMS system spec-
ifcations. The Agency Will assess interoperability and safety improvements from
cost-effectiveness perspective. The results of the assessments Will be used to propose
recommendations forimproving the legaltexts, as wellas any non-regulatory instruments;
in the spirit ofthe Better Regulation principles. Building on the IA
Work in the past years;
particular attention will be given within the ESG on evaluating the IA practice and stake-
holder feedback on the IAs. In addition, the Management Board NSA and NRB networks
Will be regularly informed about the return of experience;, lessons learnt and priorities for
the IA practice. Furthermore; the important work on women in transport; Which should
lead to the strengthening of womens employment and equal opportunities for women
and men in the transport sector will be pursued. Indeed, many studies have shown that
gender parity in the workforce increases the productivity and the cohesion ofstaff: In addi-
tion, gender parity increases diversity Ofviews;, Which in itself brings innovative solutions。
Key Performance Indicators
Key Performance Indicator
Target
Number of impact assessments deliv-
NumberofIAs corresponds tothe num-
ered for recommendations
and
opin-
berrecommendations delivered
num-
jons
berof opinions issued
Outcome indicators
Evolution in rail traffic in absolute terms
Proportion ofrail Vs road and air transport; for passenger and freight rail in the EU
3
Numberof pax-km per passengertrain-km
Numberof tonne-km per freight train-km
5
Average ERTMS costs (trackside and on-board
Resource envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTEs
3.07
3.09
3.09
Budget
30,400
30,400
30,400
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
27

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
One ofthe objectives ofthe Agencyis to become a global reference in the railway domain
Strategic Statement 7
fortechnical matters and build its reputation of a solid, resilient and trustworthy organiza-
tion. To achieve that the
Agency Will work on multiple fronts: It
support the ECin de-
The EU will become the global
signing; implementing and monitoring the EU transport foreign policy. The Agency Will
reference for railand ERA
also contribute to international standardization by strengthening its cooperation with
authorisations
be globally
European and international standardization organizations. The Agency Will also
recognised
disseminate its technical excellency via the ERA Academy, its dissemination and training
service. Furthermore; the Agency Will focus on the EC priorities in terms of technical
andgeographical areas,and
also provide the requested analyses and support。
the Agency Will also fnalise its work on the IPA projectin 2023.
Focussing on training and dissemination, in 2023-2025, the Agency will further build the
ERA Academy and its e-learning platform. The frst being the container of training initi-
atives built with academia, While the second will be instrumental in disseminating the
material developed in our policy work to our partners and stakeholders. This is particularly
true in the field ofrail safety to enhance the maturity of operators and the different control
levels in adequately taking up their responsibilities and fulfilling their activities under the
existing Safety regulatory framework. In addition, the Agency Will propose webinars on
Variety Of subjects under the expertise of the Agency and will continue to
organise EU-
wide railway events。
If more resources would become available; the
Agency could strengthen its international
presence in the established cooperation formats and in markets outside the EU by supply-
ing the industry with additional training services, focusing also on vocational training to
support the harmonisation of operational practices. This Willalso allow the Agency to be
instrumental in supporting third countries to develop Safe; efficient and reliable railways;
according to established European standards. This would increase the Agency's global
recognition in the feld and support the dissemination of the European approach:
Finally, the Agency will continue supporting the NSA, NIB and NRB Networks and facilitat-
ing interfaces between them, the European Commission, and the Agency where appro-
priate:
Performance Indicators
Performance Indicator
Target
Events and webinars, dissemination activities
Delivering ERA events
according to the yearly Com-
munication & Dissemination
plan
Outcomeindicator
Number of participants in ERA training sessions and other dissemination events
Resource
envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTEs
9.94
8.95
8.95
Budget
625,246
672,746
672,746
28
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
will
will
Will
Key
Key

In order to achieve the strategic statement 8,the Agency has identifed
intermediate
outcomes that it Will actively work towards in the following years through the related
Strategic Statement 8
portfolio of projects and services:
The Agency will ensure an effective
1. Digitalisation ofthe Agency (as strategic preparation work)
and efficient governance ofits
Single source of data forinternalaccess
portfolio ofactivities in order to
Single source of data for external access
offer the best value for money to
Data is only introduced once
citizensand business in the EU
Data is FAIR (Findable, Accessible; Interoperable & Reusable)
2.Staff understand the mission and vision ofthe Agency, internalise it and have the
flexibility, the ownership/ autonomy With their activities, and
a Clear mutual Un-
derstanding oftheir roles and responsibilities to actively contribute to the strategic
direction ofthe Agency
3.The Agency has
sound and agile governance framework Whose processes and
administration favour clarity, efficiency and decision making at the right level。
4.The SPD process steers the Agency ' strategy and multi-annual work programme de-
velopment in an integrated, evidence-based and coordinated manner as Wellas
the monitoring ofits effectiveness. This can be achieved through interfacing with
the internal stakeholders owning the strategies and the external stakeholders (EC;
EB strategic calendar etc)。
5.SPDis the single reference (for internal and external stakeholders) forall critical tac-
tical information providing the overarching view on the implementation Of the
projects and services
6.The Agency is
learning, ethical, legally complying organisation where the deci-
sion-making, the strong fnancial control, the monitoring and reporting processes
give the EDthe assurance of best value for money
As far as the digitalisation aspect is concerned the Agency has acknowledged its
importance to ensure
sustainable development of railways in Europe as a competitive
mode of transport and has the ambition to become
reference for facilitating the mul-
ti-modal data exchange and queries, based on the data-centric architecture and the
linked data technology. The Agency aims at exploiting the potential of digitalization of
the sector to the largest extent in its operations and administration. This is the reason
forthe new internal I&T strategy and the interoperable data roadmap. This will boost the
performance level ofinternal processes and willallow to have modernand simple systems
such as OSS, Registers, etc. fully functioning according to schedule and completely inter-
operable With commercial software solutions currently adopted by the railway industry
to support the operators in their daily business. Still referring to Operations; the effciency
resulting from automation of internal processes will increase the number of resourc-
es allocated to the policy making activities。
The other intermediate outcomes
Will be achieved also through the optimization of
the ERA planning, monitoring and reporting capabilities; to enhance the Agencys
programme; project, and service management framework together with the Single Pro-
gramming document and the Consolidated Annual Activity Report. This Will lead to an
allocation Of resources based on impact and intended outcome, fostering the added val-
ue created for the railway sector and an overall better performance of the Agency: An
Action Plan for the Strengthening Plan 2023-2027 is put in place; in close link to the SPD
implementation and monitoring: With ERA's organizational culture change project 'Better
togetherat ERA; the Agency will continue to invest resources and time to boost and refne
the work environment and cooperation between staff members:
Through its communication activities, the Agency Will design and implement actions to
increase ERA awareness ofthe railway system and the dynamics of the railway industry。
Moreover; the Agency will develop campaigns to provide EU citizens with relevant infor-
mation and data demonstrating the added value brought by the Agency to society:
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
29
gains

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
Key Performance Indicators
Key Performance Indicator
Target
% Ofthe annual appropriations committed
9896
2
% Execution Of carry over payment appropriations
>959
3
% Payments made by contractual deadline
9596
% Increase ofthe output achievement rate compared to the previous year
2109
5
Adoption ofthe SPD and CAAR
Adopted on time, complying
with legal deadlines
Implementation ofthe Strengthening Action Plan
Implemented following
the SAP deadlines
Outcomeindicators
Budget discipline and adequacy
2
Data is FAIR, measured ona scale
Resource envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTEs
30.42
30.42
29.32
Budget
E357,800
431,300
431,300
30
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Clause 4 ofthe ERA
Policy states that "People are our most valuable resource" Coherently,
the Agency will implement the new HR strategy 2023-2027, offering clear and transparent
Strategic Statement 9
career paths to staff members, allocate enough resources to make sure that good perfor-
mance and success stories are adequately rewarded,and that skills and competencies are
The Agency will ensure a
appropriate forthe Agency mission and kept up to date. Internal roles are not only defned
performant working environment
but also accompanied bya proper competency management system and communicated
based on high-quality motivated
externally so that interfaces are clear to the stakeholders. The Agency also acknowledges
human resources and a
the added value of diversity by implementing solutions to improve the gender balance in
collaborative behaviour
management and operational roles and to widen the number of nationalities employed.
Key Performance Indicators
Key Performance Indicator
Target
% Implementation ofthe establishment plan
>989
2
% Implementation ofthe external personnel(4) plan
>9896
3
Staff turnover
Less than 59
4
96
Availability ofthe core ICT systems
9796
5
Service Desk users' satisfaction feedback "Good/Excellent" rate
>709
Outcomeindicators
Staff satisfaction (evaluated through the Staff Engagement Survey or own survey with the same scope and ques-
tions)(s)
Highly trained staff(o) (checked through dimensions such as the evolution Of hours recorded on training in MS
Project; training budget; numberof PIT requests)
3
HR strategy action plan progress
Overtime (% worked above the 40 hours/week on a monthly basis, over
1096
5
Cloud migration
infrastructure migrated to the cloud
ICT strategy action plan progress
Resource
envelope
2023
2024
2025
FTEs
26.46
26.46
26.46
Budget
E3,604049
E3,604049
E3,604049
CA
SNE combined
Resource permitting
checked through dimensions training performance such as
evolution Of hours recorded on training in MS
Project, training budget, number of PIT requests
MULTI-ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023-2025
31
the

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
Humanand fnancial resources
outlook fortheyears 2023
2025
Overview ofthe past and current situation
Staff population overview 2021-2023
Table 1
Human resources 2021-2023()
2021
2022
2023
Authorised
Staff
Authorised
Humanresources 
underthe
populationat
underthe
Requested
EU Budget
31/12/2021
EU Budget 
Temporary Agents (TA) _
151
148
154
166(8)
Contract Agents (CA)
36
34
36
36(9)
Seconded National Experts
4(10)
(SNE)
Total staff
191
184
194
206
External staff fnanced from
5
agreements
Structural service providers
14
12
14
Complete tables are provided in AnnexIV & AnnexV
Revenues 2021-2023
For 2023, the Fees and Charges revenue number reflects the assumption taken on the in-
dexation ofthe hourly rate; as per the provisions ofthe Implementing Regulation in force
andtaking into account the
methodology endorsed by the Agencys Management Board.
For the subsidy part ofthe revenues in 2023, the updated % on EFTA contribution,as well
as the additional amount
envisaged to partially compensate for the indexation of salaries
have been factored。
Table 2
Revenues 2021-2023
Financialresources
Revenues
2021
2022
2023
(EUR)
Budget
Budget ()
Planned
Fees and charges
4,138,980
7,038,812
9,670,598
2. EU contribution
27.,061,160
26,278,423
27.418,274
3. Third countries
Revenues
contribution
693,999
656,721
801,315
EFTA)
+5.
+6+7.Other
10,000
10000
general revenues
Total
31,904,139
33,983,956
37,890,187
Complete tables are provided in Annex Ill.
Expressed in terms of number of posts (headcounts), except for "External staff financed from agreements" where
FTE is used to ensure compliance with Table 17- Additional external staff expected to be financed from grant;
contribution Orservice-level agreements in Annex IV。
Ofwhich 28 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 8 assigned to Fees and charges
Of which 0 assigned to Fees and charges
2022 budget reflects the transfers and amendments to date of the SPD 2023 adoption
(comment valid for Annex
& IlI)
32
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Expenditures 2021-2023
Table 3 - Expenditure 2021-2023
Financial resources
Expenditure
2021
2022
2023
(EUR) 
Budget
Budget
Planned
Title 1
Staff expenditure
21,321,523
21,966,714
23,473,646
Title 2
Infrastructure
and operating
1,709,740
1,862,438
2,096,800
expenditure
Expenditure
Title 3
Operational
2,939,558
3,115,992
2,649,143
expenditure
Total EU contribution
25,970,821
26,945,144
28,219,589
(Titles
+2+3)
Total Fees and charges _
3,608,193
7,038,812
9,670,598
Total
29,579,014
33,983,956
37,890,187
Complete tables are provided in AnnexIl。
The Agency will need to constantly monitorthe budget allocation for 2023 in line With its
ambition ofdeploying the envelope of 12 TAs envisaged in the EC draft budget proposal.
The 2023 budget can be further impacted by the evolution ofinflation and salary index-
ation. Several precautions have been taken into account, including late/phased hiring Of
the 12 TAs in 2023.The Agency will continuously inform the ECand the MB on the budget
implementation in 2023 and on any potential pressures arising during the year。
Outlook for the years 2023
2025
Growth of existing tasks:
In 2023, following the endorsement of the Strengthening Plan and the allocation of 12 ad-
ditional TAs to the Agency to implement it the Agency Will dedicate these resources to the
following priority domains; in line with the Strengthening Action Plan (SAP) 2023-2027:
3.1
NSA monitoring
b.)
NoBo
Monitoring
ERTMS and radio communication evolution
d) TSIs
The
cleaning of national rules (technical, operational and safety rules)
CSM ASLP(I3)
Digitalisation of the Agency's registers
New tasks
While the FTE request for 2023 for the Information Sharing System could be embedded
in the current version, the Agency will prepare
separate budget request for the ITtool
development and maintenance. The benefts from such platform if enlarged to rail stake-
holders could be quite important and the Agency believes it needs a suffcient budget to
ensure its complete implementation. The budget proposal will also include the needs of
the Group Of Analysts: With the current budget envelope; this need cannot be covered
2022 budget reflects the transfers and amendments to date ofthe SPD 2023 adoption
(comment valid for Annex Il & III)
Up until now, CSM ASLP has been resourced by decreasing the allocation of other Safety projects. The Strength-
ening Plan foresees an additional allocation of staff to CSM ASLP; a section of which will be used to allow the
aforementioned policy areas to recover their original staffing needs _
HUMAN AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES
OUTLOOK FORTHEYEARS 2023
2025
33

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
Resource programming for the years 2023
2025
Financialresources
Table 4
Financial resources
Outlook 2023-2025
Financialresources
2023
2024
2025
(EUR)
Planned
Planned
Planned
1. Fees and charges
9,670,598
9,995,325
10,019,373
2. EU contribution
27.418,274
28,645,912
29,294,000
3.Third countries
Revenues
801,315
837,845
856,871
contribution (= EFTA)
4.+5
十6.
+7.Other
general revenues
Total
37,890,187
39,479,082
40,170,244
Title
Staff expenditure
23,473,646
24,817,103
25,334,217
Title 2一
Infrastructure and
2,096,800
2,096,800
2,096,800
operating expenditure
Title 3
Operational
Expenditure
2,649,143
2,569,854
2,719,854
expenditure
Total EU contributionand
28,219,589
29,483,757
30,150,871
EFTA (Titles 1
+2+3)
Total Fees and charges
9,670,598
9,995,325
10,019,373
Total
37,890,187
39,479,082
40,170,244
Complete tables are provideain Annex 亦
Human resources
Table 5
Human resources
Outlook 2023-2025(14)
2023
2024
2025
Humanresources
Requested
ERAestimates
ERAestimates
Temporary Agents (TA)
166(15)
166
166
Contract Agents (CA)
36(16)
36
36
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
4(1)
Total staff
206
206
206
External staff fnanced from agreements
Structural service providers
Complete tables are provideain Annex NV & Annex V
Strategy for achieving effciency gains
The Agency is committed to continuously improving its functioning, streamlining its pro-
cesses, optimising the engagement of its staff; and allowing for the reallocation Of re-
sources to the most important priorities. The Agency will continue to realise the efficiency
effects from initiatives already started in the previous programming cycles, such as:
The very high degree of digitalisation, eliminating paper-processes and bringing
forward online solutions such as e-procurement; e-invoicing etc。
Expressed in terms of number of posts (headcounts/, except for
External staff financed from agreements" where
FTE is used to ensure compliance with Table 11- Additional EU
funding: grant, contribution
Service
-level agree-
mentsin Annex I。
Of which 27 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 9 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 0 assigned to Fees and charges
34
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Dm
and

The continuous cooperation ofthe Agency with the EUAN network; as wellas the
European Commission to increase its efficiency, including shared services or the
migration to SUMMA in 2022 as one ofthe three pilot agencies。
The new prioritisation exercise (arbitration)
focusing
on multiannual
planning;
and allocating resources in the most effcient manner, based on the highest value
for money forthe EU citizens。
Following
high number of valuable ad-hoc exchanges Of expertise between
EASAand ERA, the Agency has initiated the formalisation ofthe Cooperation with
EASA and has defned the initial core areas of cooperation。
While the Agency will continue to strive for an even higher efficiency all across its process-
es and activities, its ambition is to affrm its strongerand stronger position as the technical
reference for the progress With railway interoperability and safety in the EU. The Agen-
Worked, in close cooperation With the European Commission, to put forward a com-
prehensive Strengthening plan which has been endorsed by the Management Board in
2022.Its main objective is to ensure that the Agency has the right level of resources
to perform the most adding value activities in an effective and effcient manner
in line with its ambition level。
The
Strengthening plan is built on the following pillars:
1. Further
consolidating the data collection and transparency through reinforced
monitoring and
data-driven performance culture: This Willentail the use and
further improvement of the existing tools and mechanism which yielded results
starting 2021, such as the SPD dashboard。
2. Budget planning; management; and absorption leading to better budget execu-
tion. This Will entail the use and further improvement of the existing tools and
mechanism which already yielded results in 2021, such as the budget execution
monitoring. Forthe items of expenditure which represent a significant share ofthe
Agencys budget; benchmarking analyses with similar organisations Will be run
and opportunities to Use shared services with other agencies or with the EC will
beanalysed。
3
Higher administrative effciency: the Agency will further increase the direct utili-
Sation Ofall its resources; will continue to seek for process efficiencies; including
through digitalisation and automation and will look at the most effective solutions
for sub-contracting non-critical and non-sensitive pieces ofwork。
Targeting the resources to achieve the EU policy objectives. While the levelofam-
bition and action for the Agency around the defned strategic statements can be
Very high, as also confrmed by the MB expectations during the SPD 2023 work-
shop; the Agency has put in place a mechanism of internal arbitration in order to
identify and put forward the priorities Which can fit within the available envelope
Of budget and human resources in order to ensure the best value for money for
the EU citizens。
5
Predictability and sustainability Of Authority work: the Agency is continuously im-
proving the predictability of its authority tasks volume of work While also working
on the streamlining of processes, including through automation (e.9. for the con-
formity to type activities) and better training ofapplicants:
The Strengthening Plan Task Force has been set up within the Agency and it will submit its
Action Plan 2023-2027 tothe MBin November 2022.
HUMAN AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES
OUTLOOK FORTHEYEARS 2023
2025
35

Multi-annual programming 2023-2025
Negative priorities _
decrease of existing tasks
Paused activities for the year 2023
NSA Annual Performance review
Review OfNIB accident investigation reports
Integrated Management System
The Agency will no longer seek the ISO 9001 certifcation but focus all its efforts on up-
holding the European Commission Management standards and the Internal Control
Framework。
Stretched and targeted outputs for the year 2023
ERA Academy
The budget of the ERA Academy has been reduced compared to previous years;
in order to partially offset the incremental costs incurred through the addition-
al 12 FTEs granted to the Agency. This might result in longertime to implement
the ERA Academy especially in the area of providing and facilitating training While
knowledge sharing is an area Which has been highlighted on various occasions by
stakeholders as essential to improve Railway Safety。
Common Safety Methods on Assessment of Safety Level and Safety Performance
The CMS ASLP project and its future success heavily depend on the development
ofthe Information Sharing System (ISS).It could be adapted from ECCAIRSZ, Which
is
digital platform managed by the European Aviation Safety Agency assisting
aviation stakeholders in collecting, sharing, and analysing safety aviation informa-
tion. The benefts of adapting this platform to rails could be quite important and
the Agency would need
suffcient budget to ensure its complete implementa-
tion. Depending on the complexity ofthe options selected for adapting ECCAIRSZ,
costs could range from gOOk E to over 3 million E. With the current budget en-
Velope; this need cannot be covered. The Agency is further assessing the possi-
ble options and will exchange on this additional budget need with the European
Commission。
36
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

|
Annual Work
programme 2023
86

Annual Work programme 2023
Executive summary
The Annual Work Programme for 2023 details all the projects and services which will be
carried out to contribute to the Agency's goals in the year. The structure of the Work Pro-
gramme has been redesigned in orderto organise the work ofthe Agency against desired
long-term outcomes, implementing therefore an effective multi-annual work programme
with developed objectives; as wellas the intervention logic。
The annual work programme 2023 had been aligned to the priorities listed in the Agency's
Strengthening Plan and the corresponding implementing document (SAP 2023-2027),
which represents an anchor for the planning in SPD 2023 and the subsequent ones。
The Agency's efforts in 2023 are particularly focused on:
Technical and operational barriers: The Agency Will work towards the reduc-
tion of technical and operations barriers Within the rail market through; among
others; the amendment of TSIs to be aligned with the technical innovations; har-
monisation of national rules among MSs, continuous NoBo monitoring, the deliv-
ery Of 4th Railway package activities (SSC, ERTMS TA, VA), and the deployment of
ERTMS.
Safety: The Agency
strengthen safety on rail through the development of
safety culture; the monitoring of National Safety Authority, the Common Safe-
Methods on Assessment Of Safety Level and Safety Performance (within the
boundaries linked to the resource constraints for the information sharing system),
and other relevant projects。
Data develapments and ticketing: The Agency Will continue to foster develop-
ments in the feld of Linked data, as wellas development under the TAP TSI. The
Agency will continue its work on databases and registers optimisation。
Communication and dissemination: The Agency will increase communicating
and disseminating relevant information and knowledge to its stakeholders; as well
35
organising events and showcase the
interesting projects and developments
within the rail sector。
International Relations: The Agency Will continue promoting EU and interna-
tional railway legislation and standards; as wellas facilitating rail links in specific ge-
ographical areas of interest to the European Commission, in particular to improve
safety and cross-border interoperability:
Good governance: The Agency Will strive for governance excellence and eff-
ciencyin allofits activities and will continue its efforts for improving budget exe-
cution rates and overall compliance and performance:
To best illustrate the alignment between SPD 2023 and SAP 2023-2027, the indicators and
targets which contribute to the Strengthening Action Plan are indicated with a ticked box
in the annual tables hereinbelow. Moreover the number of FTEs linked to SAP 2023-2027
is also highlighted in a separate column.
38
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Will

Activities
Strategic statement 1
There will no longer be any technical and operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail,
assets can be reused throughout Europe。
Technical barriers to the
movement of people and goods by rail are eliminated
Expected outcome
Operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail are eliminated
Allrail assets can be re-used across the EU
The expected outcomes are further detailed to the following intermediate outcomes more directly linked to the Agency's safety portfolio:
Note: intermediate outcomes
1.ERTMS is fully implemented on rolling stock by all Railway Undertakings
will be further developed in
2.ERTMS is fully implemented on railway infrastructure by all Infrastructure Managers
future SPDs
3.All railway rolling stockis TSI
Technical Specifcations for Interoperability) compliant by all RUs across the EU.(exc. TAP/TAF & OPE)
4.AlI
railwayinfrastructure is TSI (Technical Specifcations for Interoperability) compliant byall IMs across the EU
5. National rules (rolling stock 
fxed installation) are harmonised across the EU
6.AlIrelevant railway-related datais shared in an open and transparent way so that it is utilisable and useful for the sector
Harmonisation and reduction of Member-State specifc National rules (both national safety rules and national technical rules) via SRD
Numberofinternational passenger/freight trains at selected border stations (interoperability reports)
Outcome indicators
Numberof hours spent at cross-border operations
Note: they will be further
ERTMS trackside deployment in the EU
developed in future SPDs
Vehicles equipped with ERTMs in the EU
Numberof open type 3 issues when
issuing VA and TA/ overall number of certificates issued
Number ofVA and TA issued with reduced validity period/ overall number of certificates issued
Numberof data consumption ofregisters
Increase the understanding of the barriers preventing the ERTMS deployment across European Rail Network
Prioritisation and kick-off ofthe TSIs CRs related to TSI Package 2022 follow-up such as telematics, security aspects, unique authorisation based on the national
rules harmonisation, digital automatic coupler (DAC) facilitating the shunting of freight wagons, new materials; new on-board sources Of energy; platformltrain
interface; noise level limit for EMU, DMU, coaches and locomotives; etc。
Finalisation ofthe cleaning Up National Rules for fxed installations
Progress towards outcome in
Improve internal data provisioning (registers) supporting more effcient authority and national rules cleaning processes by improving data quality and
2023
simplifying data architecture (fully digitized data sets)
Capitalize on the lessons learnt with National Safety rules and NSA monitoring inall MS
Continue capturing best practices/lessons learnt
NoBo monitoring
Improvements in the OSS for effcient Vehicle Authorisation for a quicker access ofvehicles to the market
Increase of reutilisation Of ERTMS trackside solutions
Identify and monitor EU Rail projects the outputs of which have potential to provide technical solutions for the next TSI Package revision
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources(l8)
71.27 FTEs + 6.37 additional FTE's from SAP implementation (recruitments expected to happen in a phased approach in 2023)
Financial resources(ig)
2,246,463 (outofwhich E 1,080,000 for NSA costs & E 374,400 for PoE costs)
Fee based
Partially
(18}
The human resources are shown in FTE
not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(3)
The financial resources shown here only take into account the direct operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources including all costs such as staff salary, IT costs etc, please refer to Annex I.
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
39
free
from

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
OOOMRA1138
NoBos monitoring
4.01
0.99
E71,250
No.of reports for NoBos audit/inspection sent to NoBos for
At least 9
reports
comments after the onsite Visit。
No.of reports for NoBos audit/inspection delivered
At least 5 reports
Anew common framework for NoBos, DeBos and AsBo
assessment and monitoring set up by the Agency (new legal
First concept drafted
base may be needed)
No.of NoBo audits performed peryear
15
ERA1172
Harmonising
2.98
1.29
E9,500
Increased harmonisation of operations
support EC with TDD
10096 of EC requests answered
railway operations
renewal
Increased performance ofand trust in MS as control level
asSess
1009of planned MS assessed (incl. impact of earlier TOif
NSR set upin MS (incl.impact ofTO,ifrelevant)
relevant)
Increased performance Of SMS
draft new regulation for
Draft new regulation and develop guidance
training
harmonisation ofType 5 NSR
Increased harmonisation of operations
defne new structure for
New TSI OPE structure fnds general acceptance
TSIOPE
ERA1175
TSIs maintenance
3.55
0.94
E34,295
CRon platform/train interface
State of play ofthe platform height completed
Update on the guides on ERA website
AIlIguides updated
TSI maintenance progress
10 CRs fnalised
CRon Rear-end Signal
CRclosed
CRon DAC
Implementation proposal
Rs on Standards
AlInew EN referred to in TSI analysed
TSIs as a global standard
International Strategy
1st Draft delivered
Lessons Learned implemented in CCM process
Harmonised CCM process implemented
CCM ready for processing System Pillar
CCM Ready byend of02
TSI Dissemination Workshops
40
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1177
Learning from TSIs
0.95
0.25
E8,550
Support to NOBOs
100 % Participation to NB Rail PLEand STR
Support to EC (TO/Advice/Derogations/ NoBos) within agreed
1009
deadlines
ERA1193
At least 209 projects of interest for the Agency monitored
Researchand
Europes Rail JU projects of interest forthe Agency monitored
depending on available resources
Innovation (S)
List of Europes Rail JU projects of interest for the Agency
1.01
E2,850
10096 ofJU new projects analysed
identifed
Support tothe Europes Rail JU and cooperation with other
At least one written communication on the Agency's research
bodies on research
needs to the relevant bodies
ERA1209
Revision OfVA
2.54
150,000
Proportion of problems detected during vehicle authorisation
guides and
activities (including pre-engagement and notifcations) for which
5 VA return of experience meetings
procedures
solutions are proposed
Proportion of problems detected
Vehicle authorisation
activities (including pre-engagement and notifcations) for which
959
solutions are proposed
Proportion of problems related to vehicle authorisation activities
(including pre-engagement and notifcations) reported by
959
stakeholders for which solutions are proposed
ERA1210
Revision Of ERTMS
Proportion of major problems assessed with a decision following
1.93
E15,200
959
Trackside approval
the change control process
ERA1213
Board of Appeal
Issuance Of fndings and decisions ofthe Board of Appealon
0.80
E52,250
>959
BOA)
time
ERA1217
Business helpdesk
1.70
Improvement plan
Delivered
VA, SSCand
ERTMS Trackside
Proportion ofthe requests on the Agency scope ofwork
approval
addressed to the business helpdesk answered within 10 working
9096
days for 2021
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
41
during

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1218
Manage ERTMS
7.92
0.60
E38000
CCSTSI
Enhanced CCS framework
Work plan (2023-2027) developed by end 2023
term
CCSTSI
Maintenance and operational activities for CCS
Publication Of CCS TSI Application guide
evolution
Framework
ERTMS Database
Enhancements/lnnovations change requests
Number of enhancement CRs closed
ERTMS Database
Error change requests
Numberoferror CRs closed
Review of ESC/RSC and roadmap for reduction
ESC/RSC roadmap proposal
Support for the EU-wide deployment of ERTMS, including
economic impact analysis to inform possible public investment
Requests of CINEA-
DG Move 1009 assessed
Drioritisation
ERA1221
Delivery SSC VA
8.40
E2,850
Issuing Approvals
Proportion of decisions taken according to
1009
ERTMS Trackside
the legal framework deadlines
approvals
Issuing Single Safety Certifcates
Proportion of decisions taken
according to the legal framework deadlines (for completeness
1009
and assessment phases)
Issuing Vehicle Authorisation, including ERTMS on-board
assessments
Proportion of decisions taken according to the
1009
legal framework deadlines (for completeness and assessment
phases)
42
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
long

Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1226
Registers
8.47
E136,800
ERADIS
Avg. processing time for ServiceDesk requests;
10 days
Operationand
document publication and users management
Development
ERADIS
Improvements according to the release plan including
10096 approved CRs delivered
agreed change requests (CR)
ERATV
% of submitted records published or clarifcation
959
requested
ERATV
processing time for ServiceDesk requests and users
10
management
ERATV
Improvements according to the release plan including
10096 approved CRs delivered
agreed change requests (CR)
EVR
Avg. migration time of received local NVRs (data) migrated
months
to EVR
EVR
Avg. processing time for ServiceDesk requests, letter
10 days
marking codes and users management
EVR
Improvements according to the release plan including
1009 approved CRs delivered
agreed change requests (CR)
OCR
processing time for ServiceDesk requests and
10
Organisation Codes management
OCR
Improvements according to the release plan including
10096 approved CRs delivered
agreed change requests (CR)
RINF handover
By end of December 2023
SAIT
processing time for ServiceDesk requests and user
10 working days
management
SAIT
Business requirements capture for ISS integration delivered
End 2023
SAIT
Migration
Full set of functionalities deployed as per
Mid 2023
technical documentation
SRD
Avg: processing time for ServiceDesk requests;
10
lettermarking codes and users management
SRD
Improvements according to the release plan including
10096 approved CRs delivered
agreed change requests (CR)
VKMR
Vehicle Keeper Merking list publication
Monthly publication
Agency becoming a registration entity for vehicles at the EU level
Proposal for EC decision sent
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
43
Avg:
days
AVg:
days
Avg:
days

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1240
Available deliverables of projects of interest (level 2 to 3)
Management
3.08
E14,250
Available deliverables of projects ofinterest (level 2 to 3)
ofInnovation
uploaded on the Tech Watch library according to resources
uploaded onto the Tech Watch library
and Long-term
availability
evolution ofthe
Coordinated Agency's position on strategic innovation activities
Position paper(s) agreed internally and shared timely with the EC
Agency
underthe System Pillare.g. ERJU MAWP
& ERJU
Communication on the updated document 'A compelling vision
Promoting the Agency's proposal(s) for its long-term evolution
for the target rail system'
ERA1243
Executing VA
16.70
f1,111,200
Executing VA
Legal deadlines and according to the process
ERA1244
Executing TA
1.51
E343,200
Executing ERTMS TA
Legal deadlines and according to the process
ERA1246
TSI
0.25
Monitoring and facilitating the TSI implementation
Drafting implementation template fnalised
implementation
Monitoring and facilitating the TSI implementation
MS implementation study developed
ERA-DRO-010
Proportion of significant problems detected
operation for
OSS releases
2.00
E219,503
959
Which solutions are available in a next release
ERA-PRG-006
National
National rules for fxed installations according to Art 14.5 and
Technical Rules
1.30
1.79
E13,965
1009 assessed according to Art 25 and 26 of ERA Regulation
14.6 OfIOP
management
RDD migration to SRD
AIIrules migrated
NRs to include in TSIs
CRs introduced
ERA-REC-129
Manage Radio
2.43
0.27
E22,800
CCM: GSM-Rand FRMCS CR's on error corrections and
042023
Communication
enhancements
evolution
Project mgt and progress reporting
042023
Technical Opinion and/or preparation of CCS TSI revision
On request
CCS TSI Application Guide specifc part for Radio: publication of
042023
the Guide with updates in line with the CCSTSI 2022.
CCS TSI maintenance (error corrections; updated application
guide)
Application guide available
44
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
during

Strategic statement 2
Rail will become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport systemand
will be favoured as a transport mode by the new generations。
Strategic statement 3
Rail traffc will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as a Service) and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will be ensured,
including multi-leg ticketing.
Improved synergies with othertransport modes, placing railways at the core ofthe new multimodal transport system
Expected outcome
Sustainability ofrailways will be further enhanced and showcased
Note: intermediate outcomes will be
Rail is the preferred mode oftransport ofnew generations
developed in future SPDs
Seamless rail traffc
Mobility as a service and Logistics as a service are ensured
Multi-leg ticketing supports the new multimodal transport system in the EU
Outcome indicators
The levelof implementation OfTAF and TAP TSIas monitored through the annual "Safety and Interoperability Progress Report"
Note: they will be further developedin
Evolution in share ofrail (both passenger and freight) in the EU's transport market compared to air, road or maritime transport
future SPDs
GHG emission from rail compared with other transport modes (shares %)
Publish at least one annual topic report on the green Agenda
Publish the Interoperability Progress report for TAF/TAP TSI
Extension Of TAP access to ticket vendors (information on timetable; tariff and journey in real-time)
Progress towards outcomein 2023
Messages on train composition, train running, and consignment/ wagon tracking will be made available to not only railway undertakings but also to
transporters sending goods by train
Harmonisation ofthe rules for the codifcation system used for combined transport
Expected resource envelope:
3.56 FTE
Human resources(zo)
E93,688
Financial resources(2)
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(3)
The financial resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources including all costs such as staff salary, IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
45

Annual Work programme 2023
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
OOGREC1128
Managethe
1.42
E18,050
Change requests included in TAF technical appendices;
042023
evolution of
according to the CCM process
Telematics
application for
Monitoring ofthe TAF TSI implementation
progress report on
freight (TAFTSI)
022023
Year -1
ERA1234
Greenagenda
0.12
E4,038
Report published and event around the results ofthe report
Annual topical report
organised
ERA-REC-122
Manage the
1.02
E55,450
Change requests included in TAP technical appendices;
Q2and 04 2023
evolution of
according to the CCM process
Telematics
application for
passengers
TAP
Monitoring ofthe TAP TSIimplementation
progress report on
022023
TSI)
Year -1
ERA-WKG-015
TDG Coordination
1.00
E16,150
No.Of meetings Where ERA supports the EC in accordance with
15
the ARart. 17.
46
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Strategic statement 4
Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure mode of transport for its users and workers。
Improved safety and security on rail
Improved
and security for rail workers
Expected outcome
The expected outcomes are further detailed to the following intermediate outcomes more directly linked to the Agencys safety portfolio:
Allrailway operators
IM, RU,ECM - understand and accept their responsibility and actively implement an SMS to control the risks ofoperational activities;
An increased performance ofand trust in the different safety related control levels in the system
ERA,MS , NSA,ASBO ECM CB,accreditation, recognition, NIB;
Safety and safety managementlperformance related data is shared in an open and transparent way;
(Numberof open type 3 issues when issuing SSC's/ overall number of certifcates issued
Numberof SSC's issued with reduced validity period/ overall number of certifcates issued
Outcome indicators
Numberof appeals made by operators in a year linked to SSC certifcation/ average number of SSC's issued peryear
Note: they will be further
Percentage of NSAs audited with at least
deficiency (focused on deficiencies still open from the 1st cycle). Note: this is a rolling indicator
developed in future SPDs
NSA Monitoring: number of deficiencies still open (follow-up ofthe 1st cycle) vs number of defciencies ofthe 1st cycle (rolling indicator) Note: this is a rolling
indicator
Numberof peer reviewed NIB's
Number ofvolunteering NIBs to participate in the NIB peer review / total numberof NIB's (on a yearly basis)
Reinforce the maturity ofoperators (i.e.IM,RU,ECM) in the implementation oftheir management systems
Progress towards outcomein
Reinforce the maturity ofthe different legal control levels in adequately fulflling their activities (ie. MS , NSA, CSM AsBo, ECM certif bodies; NoBo (DeBo), accreditation/
2023
recognitionNIBs)
Ensure and actively promote through SAIT SIS and other systems the sharing of safety related data for proper decision-making atall levels in the railway system
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources(22
26.61 FTE's + 0.99 additional FTE's from SAP implementation (recruitments expected to happen in a phased approach in 2023)
Financial resources(z3)
E868,353 (outofwhich E 4800O0 for NSA costs & E 179,400 for POE costs)
Fee-based
Partially
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(33}
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
47
safety

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional 
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
001MRA1116
NSA
Monitoring
4.62
0.31
E142,500
No.ofaudit reports delivered
At least 4
implementation
No.ofaudit reports sent to NSA for comments after the onsite
At least 6
Visit
Proper learning from the NSA monitoring
Follow-Up of deficiencies ensured
No.of NSA audits performed
Assessment of NSA Supervision activities of RUs where the
Pilot during the Znd year ofthe Znd cycle
Agency has issued the SC
004SST1088
Develop Safety
1.93
Draft report on the development of a safety culture (RSD Art
29.2)
report
Culture
Enriched training material on regulatory oversight of safety
Training material
Culture
ERA-SCS Follow up activities executed according to plan
1009
ERA-SCS on request
1009
Process to gather safety culture information based on existing
New process implemented
Agency activities
Safety Culture and Leadership Training delivered according to
1009
plan (subject to MB decision)
Safety Culture Peer Review Service on request
1009
Safety Days 2023 (Content)
Content delivered
ERA1167
Sustainable safety
5.32
E7,600
Strengthen ASBO control level
coordination of ASBO (meetings;
Meetings organised, support material published or delivered
RFU development etc)
management
Strengthen ECM control level
coordination OfECM certifcation
Meetings organised, support material published or delivered
bodies (meetings; RFU development etc:)
Strengthen SMS
develop, deliverand maintain guidance
Support material published or delivered (in collaboration with
material on SMS (incl.app; website; etc:
ERA Academy)
Strengthen SMS
develop, deliverand maintain guidance
Support material published or delivered (in collaboration with
material on CSM RAIMO
ERA Academy)
Strengthen ECM control layer
develop, deliverand maintain
Support material published or delivered (in collaboration with
guidance material on ECM certifcation
ERA Academy)
Strengthen SMS
develop; deliverand maintain guidance
Support material published or delivered (in collaboration with
material on TDG risk management
ERA Academy)
Strengthen SMS (TDG)
coordination of EUDG meetings
Meetings organised, support material developed
Strengthen SMS (TDG)
development ofthe Risk Management
RMP proof-of-concept/Beta V3.0; reference manual V3.0
Platform (RMP)
48
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Additional 
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1168
Learning
1.35
Strengthening NIB control layer
bilateral feedback provided to #
1009 delivered on request
from
NIB (possibly to be combined with NIB peer review)
performance
Strengthening SMS + strengthening NSA control layer
develop
training modules on measuring Safety performance/risk-based
Training modules developed and tested
supervision
ERA1208
Revision ofSSC
0.46
1,900
Collection offeedback, identifcation Of lessons learnedand
5 SSC plenary meetings and 2 Peer Review Group meetings
guides and
possible improvement for ERA guides and procedures
procedures
Proportion of change requests pertaining to ERA guides and
9596
procedures which lead to their revision as appropriate
ERA1219
Common Safety
3.50
0.68
E8,503
GoA/JNS fast track procedure
Final Report delivered according to the time plan set up by the
Methods on
steering group decision
Assessment
Final Report delivered according to the time plan set up by the
GoA/JNS normal procedure
OfSafety Level
steering group decision
and Safety
GoA/JNS fast track procedure
GOAIJNS proposal
Performance
GoA/JNS normal track procedure
GoA proposal & ERA follow-up report
Beta Version fnalised and tested in 2023, subject to allocation
ISS development
ofresource and IT development budget; dependent from ISS IT
description
Support to Operators and Authorities for CSM ASLP
Satisfaction ofrailway stakeholders
implementation
Subject to a separate budget request; ISS high level technical
ISS ITdescription
description including roles and responsibilities for use and
maintenance functioning ofthe Common Digital Interface
Management of the Group of Analysts
GoA meetings chaired
CSM Development
Recommendation on Appendix C
Technical Opinion on Appendix A updated according to the
CSM Development
lessons learned
CSM guidance/training
Guide on
safety performance published
CSM Implementation
User support for implementation
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
49
safety

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional 
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1224
Support to NIB
ERA to attend as observer; at least remotely, to the meetings of
0.33
E14,250
Attend to, at least, 5096 Of NIBs Peer Review meetings
Peer Review
NIB Peer Reviewed
ERA1236
Integration of
1.19
HOF Collaboration with organisations and research institutes in
Collaboration on HOF topics to build and share knowledge
Humanand
railways and other Safety domains
Organisational
Dissemination on HOF topics
HOF webinarand social media presence
Factors
Dissemination on HOF topics
2 Automation Myth Busting Series of papers published
Dissemination on HOF topics
HOF network meeting
Guidance on a HOF topic adopted and published
Training on HOFin change management toolkit
Develop and pilot HOF training content for modules includedin
Training on specifc HOF topics
the ERA Academy portfolio
ERA1242
Executing SSC
5.20
E659,400
Executing SSC
Legal deadlines and according to the process
ERA1248
Follow-up audit
report onthe state
ofimplementation
and
application of
0.66
E34,200
Report
Delivered to EC byend of 03
EU legislation on
railway safety and
interoperabilityin
Spain
ERA1249
Safety Trainings
2.05
Requests for safety trainings assessed
1009
and Assistance tO
Trainings delivered according to the request assessment
1009
Rail Stakeholders
Requests for assistance assessed
1009
STARS)
Assistance delivered according to the request assessment
1009
50
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Strategic statement 5
Rail will be resilient and agile in responding to emergency situations
Resilience ofthe rail sector to emergency situations and external events
Expected outcome
Agility ofthe rail sector to respond quickly and effciently to emergency situations
Outcome indicators
The indicators will be developed in future SPDs, as no projects will contribute to the achievement of the statement in 2023.
Progress towards outcome in 2023
There will be no progress towards outcome in 2023,as no projects have been allocated to the strategic statement at this stage:
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources
FTEs
Financial resources
E0
Fee-based
No
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
51

Annual Work programme 2023
Strategic statement 6
Rail will become increasingly economically competitive as a mode and as a sector。
Expected outcome
Economic competitiveness ofthe rail sector compared with other modes oftransport
Note: intermediate outcomes
be
developed in future SPDs
Evolution in rail traffc in absolute terms
Outcome indicators
Proportion ofrail vs road and airtransport; for passenger and freight rail in the EU
Note:
will be further developed
Number of pax-km per passengertrain-km
in future SPDs
Number oftonne-km per freight train-km
Average ERTMS costs (trackside and on-board
Increase evidence and knowledge to support impact and outcome-based decision making through:
Progress towards outcome in 2023
Impact assessments, ex-post evaluations and other economic analyses
Reporting on progress for safety / interoperability and other dedicated analyses
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources(z4)
3.07 FTE
Financial resources(s)
E30,400
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(251
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
52
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
will
they

Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1188
Impact
1.03
E15,200
Numberofimpact assessments delivered for recommendations
Number of IAs corresponds to the number recommendations
and opinions
delivered
number of opinions issued
assessments
Task Force Report endorsed by ESG
Report delivered to the ESG by December
ERA1189
Ex-post
0.50
E3,325
Number of completed ex-post evaluations
At least one
evaluations
ERA1195
Reporting on
0.61
9,500
Annual assessment report on achievements of CSTs
31/03/2023
Railway System
Annual overview for safety
Available by March
ERA1196
Dataand
information
083
2,375
Complete the targeted studies that are selected by the MT
Twotargeted studies
analysis
ERA1223
Womenin
Publication oftheses/dissertations and possibly traineeship at
0.10
transport
ERA
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
53

Annual Work programme 2023
Strategic statement 7
The EU will become the global reference for rail and ERA authorisations will be globally recognised。
Expected outcome
The EU is a global reference for railway certifcations and integration
Note: intermediate outcomes will
ERA authorisations are recognised worldwide
be developed in future SPDs
Outcome indicators
Note: they will be further
Numberof participants in ERA training sessions and other dissemination events
developed in future SPDs
Progress towards outcome in
IPAand other EU Conferences
2023
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources(zo)
9.94FTE
Financial resources(z)
E625,246
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(27}
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
54
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Additional 
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1145
ERA Academy
2.14
E335,565
Buildingand
the Academy
The Academy achieves its planned activities as described in the
managing
yearly Comm and Diss Plan,and reports regularly to the MB.
Building the Knowledge HUB (e-learning environment), Safety
The knowledge HUB is built as planned in the yearly Comm &
Management Training Project and ERA Competency Framework
Diss Plan.
Events and webinars, dissemination activities
Delivering ERA events according to the yearly Comm & Diss plan
ERA1147
Coordination
1.59
20,403
Collaboration with OSJD
Ensured
ofinternational
Collaboration with OTIF
Ensured
relations
Engagement with other international regulation bodies
Ensured
(Platform ofregulators)
Support to ECin wider international engagement
Ensured
ERA1148
Networks
1.05
E47,500
Networks
NIB cooperation
Organised
Networks
NRB management and coordination
Organised
Networks
NSA Network
Organised
ERA1151
IPA and Western
1.00
AlInational rules of IPA Benefciaries are collected , analysed and
Assistance provided by ERA
Balkans
aligned to TSIs
IPA benefciaries are familiar with EVRand actively use it. Data
Assistance provided by ERA
from existing NVRs is successfully migrated to EVR
IPA benefciaries establish a functioning NSAand NIB
Assistance provided by ERA
Train driver licensing of IPA benefciaries is up to the standard
ofthe EU.Train driver licenses issued by WBG are mutually
Assistance provided by ERA
recognized。
WB6 have an electronic register and management system of
Assistance provided by ERA
railway infrastructure; taking into account the existence of RINF
ERA1161
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
55

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional 
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
Online corporate
2.65
214,368
Community management strategy
Developed byend of Dec 2023
communication
Linkedln
Number of original posts
At least 6 posts per month
Moodle platform availability
9796 (excluding maintenance)
Organising Webinars
At least 10 webinars/year
Twitter
Numberof original posts
At least 10 posts per month
Twitter
Number of retweets
At least 12 retweets permonth
Website availability
9796 (excluding maintenance)
YoUTube
Numberof original videos
At least 2 videos per month
ERA1163
Publications
1.25
Creating and implementing communication campaigns aiming
2 Communication
at explaining ERA's mission, activities and added value
Campaigns
management
Strengthening and keeping the consistence of ERA corporate
2 internal training sessions delivered to ERA Staff
design
ERA1178
Collaboration
0.26
E7,410
Assessment ofthe new standard version to be referred toin TSIs
New version assessed within the agreed deadlines
with European
ERA-UIC coordination
Implement the coordination framework of 2021
and international
standardization
Participation to the meeting related (RASCOP CLCTTCSX CENI
5096 participation based on priority topics
organizations
TC256, ISOITC269, ISOITC2O4, IECTTC9, ETSI)
56
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Strategic statement 8 - The Agency will ensure an effective and effcient governance Of its portfolio of activities in order to offer the best
Value for money to citizens and business in the EU
Effective and efficient governance ofthe Agencys portfolio
The Agencys activities provide value for money guaranteed to EU citizens and businesses across the EU
The expected outcomes have been further detailed in the following intermediate outcomes:
Digitalisation ofthe Agency: Single source of data for internal access; Single source of data for external access; Data is only introduced once
Staffunderstand the mission and vision ofthe Agency; internalise it and have the flexibility, the ownership/ autonomy with their activities,and a clear mutual
Expected outcome
understanding oftheir roles and responsibilities to actively contribute to the strategic direction ofthe Agency
Note: intermediate outcomes will be
The Agency has a sound and agile governanceframework; whose processes and administration favour clarity; effciency and decision making at the right
further fnetuned in future SPDs
level。
The SPD process steers the Agency' strategy and multi-annual work programme developmentin an integrated,evidence-based,and coordinated manner
as Wellas the monitoring ofits effectiveness: This can be achieved through interfacing with the internal stakeholders owning the strategies and the external
stakeholders (EC, EB strategic calendar etc)
SPDis the single reference (for internal and external stakeholders) for all critical tactical information providing the overarching view on the implementation of
the projects and services
The Agencyis a learning, ethical legally complying organisation where the decision-making; the strong fnancial control the monitoring;, and reporting
processes give the ED the assurance ofbest value for money
Outcomeindicators
Note:they will be further developed in
Budget discipline (% of deviation from annual budget)
future SPDs
Data is FAIR, measured on a scale
Proper SPD-CAAR cycle implemented, with a clearfocus on compliance and performance; Strengthening plan actions for 2023 implemented
Feasibility check to measure the Agency reputation and stakeholders satisfaction via sentiment analysis; collect feedback re. the website
Progress towards outcome in 2023
Effective Data Governance in place with Reference Data appropriation
Driving an organisational culture change
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources(za)
26.54 FTE's + 3.88 additional FTEs from SAP implementation (recruitments expected to happen in a phased approach in 2023)
Financial resources(zgz
E357,800
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(29}
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
57

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1154
Supporting EBand
% of mandatory decision topics for year N covered by the EBIMB
0.65
E31,000
1009
MB
meetings
meetings
ERA1156
Organisational
7.74
66,500
Strategies identifed, steered and monitored
2
strategic
First draft endorsed by MB in January and fnal document
SPD 2024-2026
programming;
adopted by MBin November
monitoring and
MB workshop organised and workshop report circulated to the
reporting
SPD 2025
2027
participants
Budget planning, monitoring and reporting
Budget 2024 request encoded in BadgBudg
1009of budget transfers approved in line with ERA Financial
Budget planning; monitoring and reporting
Regulation provisions
Budget planning; monitoring and reporting
>989 ofappropriations committed
Budget planning; monitoring and reporting
<109of carry-over of payment appropriations forTI
Budget planning, monitoring and reporting
<2096 Of carry-over of payment appropriations for T2
Budget planning, monitoring and reporting _
<3096 Of carry-over of payment appropriations for T3
Budget planning, monitoring and reporting
>959 ofexecution of C8 payment appropriations
Budget planning, monitoring and reporting
>9596of payments made by contractual deadline
Budget review
At least 6 budget reviews organised
SPD 2023 substantial and non-substantial amendments
Adopted by MB (substantial)/ adopted by ED (non-substantial)
SPD 2023 monitoring Dashboard
Presented to MT (monthly basis) and EB/MB (at every meeting)
CAAR 2022
Adopted by MB
% ofinternall external requests for corporate performance
1009
related data and information addressed
58
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1158
Internal
3.80
% ofnonconformities identifed for which corrective/preventive
1009
actions are identifed
Managementand
Control System
Agency' most signifcant risks identifed and assessed. Remedial
Documented and reported in CAAR
actions plans in place。
Documented assessment ofthe effectiveness ofthe Internal
Prepared and included in the CAAR
control framework
Agency's processes management
% Of
Agency processes
209
revised in line with the ICF and leaning objectives
Audit implementation_% of IAS/ECA recommendations
1009
implemented in line with the action plan
Financial verifcation_
Residual error rate
following ex-post
<29
control
Financial verifcation
Information sessions on systemic errors
detected
ERA1159
% of legal acts issued by the Agency, as defned by the Agency
Legal support
2.00
100
regulation, for which legal advice was provided
ERA1160
Accounting
Opinionin the CoA annual report on reliable
Accounting
2.00
Positive
Agency accounts
ERA1162
Medialpress
0.70
Deliver effective crisis communications
No reputational damages (legal actions; written complains)
relation and crisis
Increased media coverage per ERA event compared to previous
Deliver effective media coverage Of ERA events
management
yearin relevant international media & in specialised media
Increased number ofarticles/features compared to 2022;all
Deliver effective media relations
enquiries answered within deadline; etc (details see plan)
Improve capability e.9. by early detection systems, a tool for
1009
reputation measuring/monitoring
Training delivered, quality of communications by non-SAC
Test & refresh reputational awareness of staff
improved
Improve capability: review corporate messaging, design a multi-
messages defned, improved tools and procedures; action
annual campaign; include videos; FWC with PRagency
plan
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
59
Staff
Key

Annual Work programme 2023
Additional 
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1205
No.of procurement procedures timely organised out ofthe
Procurement
3.00
total number of procurement procedures planned in the annual
>909
Service
procurement plan
ERA1222
Ethics service
0.10
% of Agency's staff trained on antifraud and Ethics
at least
59 per each type oftraining
% ofannual declaration of interests (Dol) submitted by staff
at least 909
members
ERA1225
1.34
Communication of SPD outputs for Which risks cannot be
9096 of project outputs that willnot be fully achieved
Management
controland
mitigated within Agency's control
communicated tothe Management team
supportofERA
Monthly reports for Agency's projects and services
959 collected
portfolio of
projects and
Projects at risk of not achieving SPD outputs identifed, causes
services
1009of mitigation measures proposed and implemented for
analysed, mitigation measures proposed and implemented by
projects at risk by the PMISM, POISO
the PM/SM PO/SO
ERA1227
Interoperable data
3.44
3.88
E255,550
Handoverto Registers team
Byend of December 2023
Linked data programme
implementation towards a data-centric
Defne the Agency's data architecture and relevant processes of
organisation。
its governance。
Linked data programme implementation towards a data-centric
Progress data-centricity and User-centricity。
organisation。
Linked data programme updates and continUoUs
Controlled vocabularies cover at least a part of authorisations'
implementation towards a data-centric organisation。
related data
Timely management of RINF user support requests
196
Migration plan for the individual registers to a linked data
approach, including the standardization of terminology
Draft migration plan prepared
through the ERA terminology:
60
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1228
Internal
0.82
Actions based on survey results
1009ofthe top 209 ranked according to impacts
communication
Evaluation survey
One survey peryear
lifecycle
ERA1231
DPO (Data
Percentage of pieces ofadvice and consultation provided on
0.30
1009
Protection Officer)
time
ERA1235
Better together
0.55
E4,750
Change plan updated with the last 6 work packages
Implementation ofthe change plan
at ERA
ERA1237
Revision of
0.10
Production environment of ARES put in place
01
Document
Internal coordination on ARES implementation within the
Organised with all units/departments
Managementand
Agency
Archiving
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
61

Annual Work programme 2023
Strategic statement 9
The Agency will ensure a performant working environment; based on high-quality motivated human resources
and a collaborative behaviour
Expected outcome
Performant working environment at the Agency
Note: intermediate outcomes
Collaborative behaviour showcased through all processes and deliveries ofthe Agency
be further developed in future
SPDs
High-quality service delivery
Staff satisfaction (evaluated through the Staff Engagement Survey or own survey With the same scope and questions)
Highly trained staff (checked through dimensions training performance such as the evolution of hours recorded on training in MS Project; training budget;
Outcome indicators
numberof PITrequests)
Note: they will be further
HR
strategy action plan progress
developed in future SPDs
Overtime (% worked above the 40 hours/week on a monthly basis, over
1096)
Cloud migration -
infrastructure migrated to the cloud
ICT strategy action plan progress
Clarify the concept of digital transformation, defning the scope and the impacton the Agencys activities. Baselining
Setting the strategic landscape for HR, Registers; IT,etc
Appropriate supplyofworking tools, such as SYSPERZ, SUMMA, New SharePoint environment and deployment of cloud-based services
Facilitating the network compatibility checks done by the RUs by mean ofapplications based on RINF Register accessible as Linked Data
Progress towards outcome in
Competency management framework:
2023
Self-assessment for the PAD action plan testing the process for future development
Fully deployedin IMS
Align staff IT literacy with new environments (e9. Power Bl, planner PowerApps,etc)
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources(o
26.46 FTE
Financial resources
E983,049
Title 3 &4.3) +E2,621,000 (Title 2 &4.2) =>E3,604,049
Fee-based
Partially
()
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
62
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
will

Additional
Budget
SAP
Project Name
FTE
FTEfrom
Output indicator
Output Target
assigned
linked
SAP
ERA1201
ICTService
10.91
E982,455
Average yearly availability of the Critical
systems
9796
from
Average yearly availability of the Essential
systems
959
relevant
Average yearly availability of the Necessary IT systems
939
chaptersin
T3/4.3 +
1,308,000
from
ServiceDesk user satisfaction feedback "Good/Excellent" rate
>709
relevant
chaptersin
T2/4.2
ERA1202
FM Service
7.70
f1,313,000
Execution ofevacuation exercise at the ERAHQ
At least
exercise peryear
from
relevant
ServiceDesk Users' satisfaction feedback
Good/Excellent"
>709
chaptersin
rate
T2/T4.2
ERA1203
HR Service
7.63
f594
% implementation ofthe establishment plan
9896
% ofstaff turnover
Lowerorequalto 59
% implementation ofthe external personnel plan (CAs and SNEs)
89
ServiceDesk Users' satisfaction feedback "Good/Excellent" rate
>709
ERA1207
New ERA building
0.22
Study
Phase 5: "Assistance consultation concours Maitrise
Completion of phases 5 &6 ofthe Study
Phase 2
doeuvre" and Phase 6 "Conception, mise au point et optimisation
projet" (total of one year maximum)
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2023
63
Very

Annual Work programme 2023
Methodological note:
A.FTEs
the resources are planned for the Strategic Statements (in line With the enve-
lopes shown above), as wellas for ERA Management and administration。
The table shows in
separate column ("Additional FTE from SAP") the allocation ofthe
additional resources envisaged in the EC proposal (12 TAs), to which a correction factor has
been
applied in terms of phased/late hiring out of prudence:
The margin up to the maximum establishment plan accommodated the difference be-
tween headcount and FTEs
part time Work late hiring to cope with the budget con-
straints etc)
Additional
Strategic statement
FTE
Total FTE
FTEs from SAP
Strategic statement
71.27
6.37
77.63
Strategic statement 283
3.56
3.56
Strategic statement 4
26.61
0.99
27.60
Strategic statement 5
Strategic statement 6
3.07
3.07
Strategic statement
9.94
9.94
Strategic statement 8
26.54
3.88
30.42
Strategic statement 9
26.46
26.46
ERA Management and administration
23.15
23.15
Total
192.60
11.23
201.83
B.Budget -
the fnancial resources are planned as follows:
Note onthe linkto
Feesand
Expenditures
the PIS fromthe 
EU Subsidy
Total
annual section
charges
Staff costs
These are not included
E23,473,646
E6,561,504
E30035,150
in the P/S budget
envelopes in the
annual section above
Infrastructure
These are includedin
E2,096,800
E524,200
E2,621,000
operating
the budget for the ICT
expenditure
Service and the FM
Service (StSt 9)
Operational
These are includedin
1,834,140
E2,388,403
4,222,543
expenditure
the budget forall the
P/Sin StStl
StSt 9
Outofwhich
Allocated by ERA
E1,560,000
1,560000
Costs for NSAs for
P/S (ERA1242,1243,1244)
the F&C
Outofwhich
Allocated by ERA
E553,800
553,800
Costs for PoEfor
P/S (ERA1242,1243,1244)
the F&C
Meetings;
Not allocated by ERA
29,040
29,040
missions, other
P/S
Costs
Other
Allocated underthe
785,964
E196,491
982,455
operational
 ICTservice in StStg
expenditure
TOTAL
E28,219,589
E9,670,598
E37,890,187
64
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
(e9:

IV.Annexes
78678
256T

Annexes
Annex |.Organisational chart
Figure1
Organisational chart as of 01/01/2023
Executive Director (ED)
Railway Systems (RSY)
Accounting
Department
Rolling Stock & Fixed
Legal
Unit
Installations (FIRST)
Safety & Operations (SAFO)
Ethics
Team
ERTMS and Telematics
Innovation and
Other function
Applications (ERTMS)
Technology
Planning & Approvals Delivery
Executive Offce &
Corporate Assurance &
Analysis & Monitoring (AAM)
Resources & Support (RSU)
(PAD)
Communication (EXO)
Performance (CAP)
Conformity
Vehicle
Analysis
International Relations
Corporate Performance
Human Resources
to Type
Authorization (VA)
Stakeholders Rel
Internal Control &
Safety Certifcation (SSC)
Monitoring
Academy &
Financial Verifcation
ITFM
Communications
ERTMS Trackside Approval
Data Information &
Registers
Databases
Budget
(TA)
Governance
Portfolio Management
Digital
Research
Support
Transformation
66
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Table 6
Number of posts for each organisational entity (headcount)
EU contribution & Fees & charges
Grants, Contrib & SLAs
Department Unit; or Team
Grand Total
TA
CA
SNE
C Posts
TA
CA 
SNE
5Posts
Executive Director (ED)
8
8
ED (general)
Railway Systems (RSY)
65
70
73
RSY (general)
9
ERTMS & Telematics (ERTMS)
21
22
22
Rolling Stock & Fixed Installations (FIRST)
19
19
20
Safety & Operations (SAFO)
16
20
22
Planning & Approvals Delivery (PAD)
20
29
29
PAD (general)
ERTMS Trackside Approval (TA)
2
2
Portfolio Management & Support
Safety Certifcation (SSC)
3
Vehicle Authorisation (VA)
Analysis & Monitoring (AAM)
30
2
32
32
AAM (general)
5
5
5
Analysis
Monitoring
12
12
12
Registers & Databases
Executive Offce & Communication (EXO)
14
8
24
3
25
EXO (general)
Data Information & Governance
International Relations
Stakeholders Relations; Academy & Communications
10
10
Corporate Assurance & Performance (CAP)
10
15
15
CAP (general)
Corporate Performance
Resources & Support (RSU)
19
8
27
27
RSU (general)
Human Resources
ITFM
12
19
to beassigned
Grand Total
166
36
206
210
ORGANISATIONAL CHART
67

Annexes
Annex I. Resource allocation per activity
2023
2025(31)
Table 7
Resource allocation 2022
2025(32)
2022
2023
2024
2025
Revenue
Activity
CAt
CAt
二
CA 十
二
CA +
SOUrCe
CFTE 
TA
Budgete 
CFTE
TA
Budget e
TA
Budgete 
TA
Budgete 
SNE
SNE
Headc。 
SNE
Headc。 
SNE
EU cont。
39.3
35.8
3.5
6,685,676
45.4
41.6
3.8
8,401,150
50.
46.3
3.8
9,365,397
50.1
46.3
3.8
9,594,329
StSt
F&C
388
30.8
8.0
7,038,812
29.
22.3
6,553,584
28.9
22.
6.8
6,616,408
28.8
22.0
6,718,901
6CSLA
2.3
00
2.3
260,000
3.1
2.4
250,000
3.0
2.4
1.5
0.9
StSt 2-3
EU cont。
3.6
3.0
0.6
599,968
3.6
2.9
669,927
3.6
2.9
633,106
3.6
2.9
644,620
EU cont
25.1
16.1
90
4,334,280
22.4
188
3.6
3874555
24.
20.1
4.0
4,205,655
23.
19.
4.0
4,095,195
StSt 4
F&C
N/AO3)
NJA
5.2
4.0
1.2
1,562,773
5.
3.9
1.2
1,566,466
4.9
3.7
1.2
1,550,225
StSt 5
EUcont。
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
StSt 6
EU cont
2.4
2.3
384.592
3.
3
566,611
3.
0.0
577,994
3.
588,794
EU cont。
78
7.0
1,938,904
8.9
4.1
48
,858,993
4.
4.8
1,924,538
90
4.
4.8
949,136
StSt 7
6CSLA
4.0
00
4.0
580,735
1.0
0.2
8
0
0.0
0.0
StSt 8
EUcont:
51.6
43.2
8.4
8,819,071
29.4
19.9
9.5
4,851,280
30.4
20.9
95
5,162,438
29.3
19.8
9.5
5,057,693
StSt 9
EU cont。
24.9
16.2
8.7
4.182,653
26.5
18.5
80
5064,047
26.5
18.5
80
5,120,799
26.5
18.5
80
5,202,258
EU cont
N/A
N/A
16.8
14.5
2.3
2,933,025
19.3
16.7
2.6
2,493,829
18.4
15.8
2.6
3,018845
M8A(4)
F&C
N/A
NIA
6.3
4.9
1.4
1,554,241
3.8
2.9
0.9
1,812,452
3.8
2.9
750,247
C EU contribution
154.7
123.6
31.1
26,945,144
156.
123.4
32.7
28,219,589
166.0
132.6
33.4
29,483,757
163.0
129.6
33.4
30,150,871
2 Fees and charges
38.8
30.8
8.0
7,038,812
40.6
31.2
9.5
9,670,598
37.8
28.9
8.9
9,995,325
37.5
28.6
8.9
10,019,373
Total EU + FRC
193.4
154.4
39.1
33,983,956
196.8
154.6
42.2(35)
37,890,187
203.9
161.5
42.4
39,479,082
200.5
158.2
42.4
40,170,244
CGrants; Cont [.
6.3
0.0
6.3
840,735
4.132
2.6
1.5
250,00006)
3.0
2.4
0.7
1.5
0.9
0.7
Grand Total
199.8
154.4
45.4
34,824,691
200.8
157.2
43.6
38,140,187
206.9
163.9
43.0
39,479,082
202.0
159.0
43.0
40,170,244
Staff numbers
in line with EU Draft Budget
'2.1.2 European Union Agency for Railways -
ERA"
include statutory staff only (establishment plan and external staff); as
consequence, Structural service providers, and Interim workers are not
included. External
fnanced from grant, contribution or service-level agreements are shown on separate lines
Title 1 & 2 budget distributed pro rata based on the FTE allocation. FTE and budget allocation for 2024-2025 is tentative。
In 2022, SSC-related activities were included under Strategic Statement
ERA management and administration (incl. Meetings, missions, other costs), in 2022 shown under Strategic Statement 1 (Fees and charges), 8,and 9
Distribution of resources is based on the real allocation of FTEs between projects/services. While 3 CAs are envisaged for System Pillarand 1 CA for IPA in terms of headcount; other staff with TA contracts are also allocated to support these
streams Ofwork_
Amount on
Grants, Contrib
& SLAs reflect the actual cash flows, not the real staff cost
68
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Staff

Annex Ill.
Financial Resources 2023-2025
T1.Revenue
General revenues
Table 8 - Overview ofrevenues
2022
2023
Revenues (EUR)
Estimated
Budget forecast
2.EU contribution
26,278,423
27.418,274
1.+3.+4.
5+6.
7. Otherrevenue
7,705,533
10,471,913
Ofwhich 1. Revenues from fees and charges
7,038,812
9,670,598
Ofwhich 3. Third country contribution (= EFTA)
656,721
801,315
Totalrevenues
33,983,956
37,890,187
Table 9 - General revenues
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
VAR 2023/2022
Revenues
Budget
Budget
Agency request
Budget forecast
Envisaged
Envisaged
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR) 
1. Revenues from fees and charges
4,138,980
7.038,812
9,826,585
9,670,598
20.39
9,995,325
10019,373
2.EU contribution*
27,061,160
26,278,423
28,736,506
27.418,274
4.39
28,645,912
29,294,000
ofwhich assigned revenues deriving from previous years^
59,486
114,224
69,638
69,639
-39.09
surpluses
3. Third countries contribution (incl. EEA/EFTA and
693,999
656,721
719,538
801,315
22.09
837,845
856,871
candidate countries)
ofwhich EEA/EFTA (excl. Switzerland)
693,999
656,721
719,538
801,315
22.09
837,845
856,871
ofwhich candidate countries
4. Other contributions
5. Administrative operations
ofwhich interest generated by funds paid by
the Commission by way ofthe EU contribution
(FFR Art. 58)
6. Revenues from services rendered against payment
10,000
10,000
100.09
7. Correction of budgetary imbalances
Total revenues
31,904,139
33,983,956
39,282,629
37,890,187
8.3%
39,479,082
40,170,244
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 2023-2025
69

Annexes
Additional EU funding: grant contribution and service-level agreements
Table 10
Overview onadditional EU funding
2022
2023
Revenues 
Budget
Budget forecast
(EUR)
(EUR)
Total revenues
840,735
250,000
Table 11
Additional EU funding: grant contribution and service-level agreements
2022
2023
2021
2024
2025
VAR 2023/2022
Revenues
Budget
Budget
Agency request
Budget forecast
(%)
Envisaged
Envisaged
(EUR)
(EUR)
EUR)
(EUR) 
(EUR)
(EUR)
Additional EU funding stemming from Grants (FFR Art 7)
300,400
580,735
100.09
Dm
Dm
Additional EU funding stemming
Contribution
260,000
260,000
250000
250,000
3.89
pm.
pm
Agreements (FFR Art.7)
Additional EU funding stemming from Service-Level
35,376
Agreements (FFR Art. 43.2)
Total
595,776
840,735
250,000
250,000
-70.3%
pm
pm。
Forthe list ofagreements and further details, refer to Annex XI Plan for grant contribution or service-level agreements。
Due to the project extension to 31/12/2023 the remaining amount of E 192,464 from 2022 will be spentin 2023.
70
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
from

T2.Expenditure
Expenditure
Table 12
Expenditure
Expenditure
2022
2023
(EUR)
Commitment
appropriations
Paymentappropriations
Commitment
appropriations
Paymentappropriations
Title
Staff expenditure
21,966,714
21,966,714
23,473,646
23,473,646
Title 2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
1,862,438
862,438
2,096,800
2,096,800
Title 3
Operational expenditure
3,115,992
3,115,992
2,649,143
2,649,143
Total EU contribution
26,945,144
26,945,144
28,219,589
28,219,589
Title
Staff expenditure
3,386,620
3,386,620
6,561,504
6,561,504
Title 2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
207,459
207.459
524,200
524,200
Title 3 -
Operational expenditure
3,444,733
3,444,733
2,584,894
2,584,894
Total Fees and charges
7,038,812
7,038,812
9,670,598
9,670,598
Total EU contribution + Fees & charges
33,983,956
33,983,956
37,890,187
37,890,187
Grant Agreements
580,735
580,735
Contribution Agreements
260,000
260,000
250,000
250,000
Service-Level Agreements
Total Grants, Contrib. & SLAs
840,735
840,735
250,000
250,000
Grand Total
34,824,691
34,824,691
38,140,187
38,140,187
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 2023-2025
71

Annexes
i
Commitment appropriations
Table 13 - Commitment appropriations (EU contribution)
2023 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2021 Budget
2022 Budget
VAR 2023/2022
(EU contribution) 
(EUR)
(EUR) 
Agency request
Budget forecast
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 1
Staff expenditure
21,321,523
21,966,714
25,083,777
23,473,646
6.9%
Salaries & allowances
21,007,009
21,488,714
24,487.,583
22,941,729
6.89
Ofwhich establishment plan posts
18,545,594
18,806,214
21,531,105
20,177,137
7.39
Ofwhich external personnel
2,461,415
2,682,500
2,956,478
2,764,592
3.196
Expenditure relating to staff recruitment
47.923
127,000
141,148
117,600
-7.49
Employers pension contributions
Mission expenses
957
10,000
8,160
8,000
20.09
Socio-medical infrastructure
1,814
50,000
72,014
60,000
20.09
Training
88,819
125,000
144,029
120,000
4.096
External services
168,274
45,000
212,075
207,917
43.49
Receptions, events and representation
67
1,000
2,448
2,400
40.09
Social welfare
6050
20,000
16,320
16,000
20.09
Other Staff related expenditure
Title 2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
1,709,740
1,862,438
2,138,736
2,096,800
12.6%
Rental of buildings and associated costs
1,018,369
1,082,582
1,010,208
990,400
8.59
Information, communication technology and data processing
563,811
701,253
973,488
954,400
36.
9
Movable property and associated costs
39,166
31,826
29,376
28,800
9.59
Current administrative expenditure
4,456
3,428
27,744
27,200
693.596
Postage
telecommunications
81,640
37,69一
93,840
92,000
144.
9
Meeting expenses
Running costs in connection with operational activities
Information and publishing
2.298
5,658
4,080
4,000
29.39
Studies
Other infrastructure and operating expenditure
72
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

2023 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2021 Budget
2022 Budget
VAR 2023/2022
(EU contribution) 
(EUR)
(EUR) 
Agency request
Budget forecast
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 3
Operational expenditure
2,939,558
3,115,992
2,233,531
2,649,143
-15.0%
Operational expenditure - Strategic Statements
1,302,879
1,951,491
1,209,041
1,863,180
4.59
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
335,055
517,460
54.496
Ofwhich Strategic Statements 2 &3
15,000
15,000
93,688
524.696
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 4
279,901
279,901
208,953
-25.396
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 5
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 6
30,400
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
681,707
681,707
625,246
-8.39
Ofwhich Strategic Statement8
474,387
474,387
357,800
-24.69
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 9
165,441
165,441
594
99.69
Ofwhich ERA management and administration
206,435
29,040
Other operational expenditure
1,636,679
,164,501
1,024,490
785,964
32.59
Total
25,970,821
26,945,144
29,456,044
28,219,589
4.79
Table 14 - Commitment appropriations (Fees and charges)
2023 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2021 Budget
2022 Budget
VAR 2023/2022
(Feesand charges)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 4.1
Staff expenditure
2,287,365
3,386,620
5,392,628
6,561,504
93.7%
Salaries & allowances
1,821,341
2,885,000
4,762,553
5,947.499
106.29
Ofwhich establishment plan posts
1,821,341
2,520,000
4,335,615
5,113,423
102.99
Ofwhich external personnel
365,000
426,938
834,076
128.59
Expenditure relating to staff recruitment
35,287
29,400
Employer's pension contributions
466,024
501,620
481,026
481,026
9
Mission expenses
2,040
2,000
Socio-medical infrastructure
18,004
15,000
Training
36,007
30,000
External services
53,019
51,979
Receptions, events and representation
612
600
Social welfare
4,080
4,000
Other Staff related expenditure
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 2023-2025
73

Annexes
2023 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2021 Budget
2022 Budget
VAR 2023/2022
(Feesand charges)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 4.2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
52,317
207,459
534,684
524,200
152.79
Rental of buildings and associated costs
52,317
108,549
252,552
247,600
128.19
Information, communication technology and data processing
98,910
243,372
238,600
141.296
Movable property and associated costs
7,344
7.200
Current administrative expenditure
6,936
800
Postage
telecommunications
23,460
23,000
Meeting expenses
Running costs in connection with operational activities
Information and publishing
1,020
1,000
Studies
Other infrastructure and operating expenditure
Title 4.3
Operational expenditure
1,268,511
3,444,733
3,899,273
2,584,894
25.09
Operational expenditure - Strategic Statements
1,268,511
3,204,733
3,520,718
2,388,403
-25.59
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
3,047,804
2,928,689
1,729,003
-43.396
Ofwhich Strategic Statements 2-3
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 4
659,400
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 5
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 6
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
156,929
229,715
-100.09
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 8
362,314
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 9
Ofwhich ERA management and administration
Other operational expenditure
240,000
378,555
9649
18_
9
Total
3,608,193
7,038,812
9,826,585
9,670,598
37.4%
V
Payment appropriations
Payment appropriations in current and planning years are identical to commitment appropriations
74
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

T3.Budget outturn and cancellation ofappropriations
Table 15
Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations
Budget outturn (EUR)
2018
2019
2020
2021
Reserve from the previous years' surplus (+)
80,722
119,879
59,486
114,225
Revenue actually received (+)
28,850,412
28,644,227
30,761,007
32,834,965
Payments made
-26,386,114
-26041,310
-27.440,679
-29,908,642
Carry-over of appropriations
3,509,588
-2,931,959
4,097,690
3,894,958
Cancellation of appropriations carried over
122,715
54,280
106,232
30,110
Adjustment for carry over of assigned revenue appropriations
previous
1,045,234
335,358
785,738
1,008,478
year (+)
Exchange rate differences (+/)
2,780
1,110
383
-315
Adjustment for negative balance from previous year ()
80,722
119,879
59,486
114,225
Total
119,879
59,486
114,225
69,638
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 2023-2025
75
from

Annexes
Annex IV.Human Resources 2023-2025
quantitative
T4.Staff population and its evolution: overview ofall categories of staff
A.
Statutory Staff and SNE(38)
Table 16
Establishment plan posts
Human resources
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
FTE
corresponding
Actually flledas
Occupancy rate 
Establishment plan posts
Authorised staff
Envisaged staff
Envisaged staff
Envisaged staff
toauthorised
0f 31/12/2021
%
budget
Administrators (AD)
116
114
9896
120(39)
134(40)
134
134
Assistants (AST)
35
34
9
3443
32(41)
32
32
Assistants/Secretaries (AST/SC)
Total establishment plan posts
151
148
98%
154
166
166
166
FTE
FTE 
FTE
corresponding 
Actually fledas
Executionrate 
corresponding 
corresponding 
External
Envisaged FTE
Envisaged FTE 
toauthorised
0f31/12/2021
%
toauthorised
toauthorised
budget
budget
budget
Contract Agents (CA)
36
34
9496
36
36(42)
36
36
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
5096
4(43)
Total external staff
40
36
90%
40
40
40
40
Total staff
191
184
96%
194
206
206
206
Staff financed from grant, contribution or service-level agreements not included in this table, but under Additional external staff expected to be financed from grant,
contribution or service-level agreements below
One AST post converted to AD as per MB Decision n。 299
(}
Of which 27 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich
assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 8 assigned to Fees and charges
(4}
Ofwhich 0 assigned to Fees and charges
76
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Staff

B。
Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant; contribution or service-level agreements
Table 17
Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant, contribution or service-level agreements(44) (45)
Human resources 
2022
2023
2024
2025
External staff fnanced fromagreements
Envisaged FTE 
Envisaged FTE 
Envisaged FTE 
Envisaged FTE 
Contract Agents (CA)
Dm
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
Total external staff
D.m
Other Human Resources
Table 18
Structural service providers(46)
Structural service providers 
Actuallyin placeas Of 31/12/2021
Infrastructure
Service Desk
Security
Registers (including OSS)
Other
Software management/development
Total structural service providers
12
Table 19
Interim Workers
Interim Workers
FTEsin 2021 
Total interim Workers
For the list of agreements and further details on the split of FTEs between these agreements, refer to Annex XI Plan for grant, contribution
Orservice-level agreements
Extension of the IPA grant agreement to 2023 under negotiation。
(4)
Service providers are contracted by
private company and carry out specialised outsourced tasks of a horizontal/support nature.
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUANTITATIVE
77

Annexes
T5.Multi-annual staff policy plan 2021-2025
Table 20 - Temporary Agents
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Temporary
Authorised budget
Actually flled 31/12
Authorised budget
Authorised budget
Request of ERA
Request of ERA
Agents
Perman。
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
posts
posts
posts
posts 
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts 
posts
posts 
AD 16
AD 15
AD 14
AD 13
AD 12
AD 11
10
14
16
AD 10
19
22
22
19
18
AD9
29
19
23
19
22
25
AD8
21
25
22
24
22
20
AD 7
15
14
18
20
24
28
AD 6
24
19(4)
25
17
12
AD5
2
2
TotalAD
116
114
12051
134
134
134
AST 1
AST 10
AST9
AST8
AST
AST 6
451
AST5
AST4
10
10
AST 3
5
AST2
AST
TotalAST
35
34
3451
32
32
32
Total ASTISC
Total TAs
151
148
154
166
166
166
147
One AST 6 post converted to AD 6 as per MB Decision n。 299
78
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Table 21
Contract Agents
FTE
FTE
Contract Agents
correspondingto 
Executed FTEas Of
Actually fledas
correspondingto 
FTErequest for 
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
theauthorised
31/12/2021 
0f31/12/2021
theauthorised
2023
2024
2025
ERA staff (External personnel)
budget 2021
budget 2022
Function Group IV
16
22
23
23
23
23
Function Group Il
12
5
Function Group
Function Group
Total
36
NIA
34
36
36
36
36
Contract Agents
FTE
FTE
correspondingto 
Executed FTEas Of
Actually fledas
correspondingto 
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
External staff fnanced from
theauthorised
31/12/2021
0f31/12/2021
theauthorised
2023
2024
2025
Grants, Contrib。 & SLAs
budget 2021
budget 2022
Function Group IV
Dm
Function Group Il
Function Group
Function Group
Total
NIA
pm。
pm
Table 22
Seconded National Experts
FTE
FTE
correspondingto 
Executed FTEas Of
Actually fledas
correspondingto 
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
Seconded National Experts
theauthorised
31/12/2022
0f31/12/2022
theauthorised
2024
2025
2026
budget 2022
budget 2023
Total
NIA
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUANTITATIVE
79

Annexes
T6.Recruitmentforecasts 2023 following retirementlmobility ornew requested posts
Table 23
Recruitment forecast
Type of contract
TA / Offcial(48)
(Offcial, TA Or CA)
Jobtitlein the Agency
CA(49)
Dueto foreseen retirementl
New post requested dueto 
Internal 
External
mobility
additionaltasks
Project Offcer
Dm
12TAs
pm_
Dm
Engagement of additional TA and CA (Project Offcers), taking into account the priorities from the Strengthening Plan Action Plan 2023-2027
Open posts for SNEs to be filled from Calls for expression of interest published on the Agency's website
Foreseen retirementin 2023:3
Inter-agency mobility 2022: pim。
Function Broup/grade of recruitment internal (brackets) and external (single grade) foreseen for publication
(99}
Recruitment Function Group (I,IL, Illand IVI
80
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Annex VHuman
Resources 2023-2025
qualitative
A.Recruitment (engagement) policy
Implementing rules in place
Table 24 - Implementing rulesin place
Topic
Model decision
Yes 
No
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015as
Engagement OfTA
Model Decision C(2015)1509
per AB decision (see below)
Applied by analogy since 02/10/2019as
Engagement ofCA
Model Decision C(2019)3016
per MB decision (see below)
Middle management
Model decision C(2018)2542
Applied by analogy since 25/06/2019as
per MB decision(so)
Applied by analogy since 25/06/2019as
Type of posts
Model Decision C(2018)8800
per MB decision(si)
The following general principles guide the application ofthe legal framework concerning
the Agency staff:
The core of the Agency staff consists Of Temporary Agents。
AIl
Temporary Agent
positions have been identifed as long-term positions. Due to the budgetary and
establishment plan constraints the Agency is obliged to also engage Contract
Agents in order to fulfl its mission;
b) Temporary and Contract Agents are treated equivalently as far as possible。
In addition, it should be noted the Agency does not employ offcials: However; there are
cases Where EU offcials have been engaged following an external selection procedure
and have therefore acquired the status of Temporary Agent in the Agency (whilst remain-
ing an official on unpaid leave in their institution oforigin).
Selection and engagement procedures:
The procedure for selection and engagement of Temporary Agents and Contract Agents
is based on Articles 27-34 of the Stoff Regulations and Articles 12-15 and 82-84 of the
Conditions OfEmploymentof OtherSeryants ofthe European Communities (CEOS); the
related Implementing Rules on the engagement and use ofTemporary Agents and Con-
tract Agents; the Financial Regulation (Eurgpeap Commissions Eramework and thatofthe
Agency), the Code ofGood Administrative Behaviourand the data protection rules。
The Agency also makes use ofthe EPSO CAST lists accessible to Agencies for the engage-
ment of Contract Agents. Because of the Agreement on the European Economic Area
nationals of Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein are eligible for working for the Agency。
Oecisionr204 ofthe Management Board of the European Union Agency for Railways on middle management staff
Decision n203 of the Management Board of the European Union Agency for Railways on types of post and post
titlesin ERA
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUALITATIVE
81

Annexes
The selection procedures for the engagement of Temporary Agents are carried outin ac-
cordance with DecisionNo 121 Ofthe Administrative Boardofthe European RailwayAgen
Cy laying down the general implementing provisions on the procedure governing the
engagement and use oftemporary staff under Article 2(f) ofthe CEOS。
Depending on the function and the level of tasks and within the limits authorised by the
establishment plan ofthe Agency, Temporary Agents are engaged at the following entry
AST
to AST 4forthe function group AST
AD 5to AD8 forthe function group AD
For managerial posts or highly specialised posts; the Agency can engage Temporary
Agents at grades AD 9and AD1Oor at grade AD12 for Heads of Department。
The duration of contracts for Temporary Agents is governed by Decision
ERA-ED-
DEC-1109-2015. Staff holding a long-term postare normally offered an initial contract with
duration of four years With the possibility of renewal The standard practice for a frst re-
newal is normally for a two-year period and any further renewal is foran indefinite period.
For staff on short-term employment the duration of the contract depends on the dura-
tion ofthe tasks to be carried out.At ERA, the duration ofthose contracts is predominantly
related to the availability and duration of grants; or to a specific time determined project。
In very rare cases it is to cover long-term absences:
The Agency is launching the following types of calls; published on ERAwebsites Recrut
ment portal
Call for Interest (partial internal re-assignment): CFIIERAI.
Internal
Mobility for Temporary Agents-Administrators: IMIERAIADI .
Internal Mobility for Temporary Agents-Assistants: IMIERALASTI .
Inter-Agency Mobility for Temporary Agents-Administrators: IAMERAIAD/.
Inter-Agency Mobility for Temporary Agents-Assistants: IAMIERAIASTI.
External calls for Temporary Agents-Administrators: ERA/AD/2021 /.
External calls for Temporary Agents-Assistants: ERAASTI.
External calls for Contract Agents: ERA/CA/2021/.
才
Temporary agents
The ERARegylatign 2016/796 which entered into force in 2016 makes no distinction be-
tween posts for
term and short-term employment. Still a post can, in accordance
With Article 16 of Decision No 121, be defned to be for short-term employment when it
involves tasks ofa limited duration。
The decision to renew contracts of employment of Temporary Agents occupying a long-
term post is taken by the Executive Director based on two considerations: the continuity
ofthe post and the competences and performances of the jobholder; in accordance with
Decision NC
ERA-ED-DEC-678-2013 and the Procedure PRO_STA_O1
on the "renewal and
non-renewal of contracts of employment before the expiry date"
Ifa TA or former TA is awarded a second contract of employment in the same function
group, this contract shall be considered as a renewal in the sense of Article 8 ofthe CEOS if
the period between the end ofthe frst contract and the starting date ofthe new contract
is less than 6 months. Ifthe period between the two contracts ofemploymentis 6 months
ormore orifthe new contract is in a different function group, the second contract ofem-
ployment shall be considered a new contract of employment。
82
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
grades:
long-

卅
Contract agents
The selection procedures for the engagement of Contract Agents are carried out in ac-
cordance with Decision n 210 ofthe Management Board ofthe European Union Agency
on the general provisions for implementing Article 79(2) ofthe CEOS, governing the con-
ditions of employment of contract staff employed under the terms of Article 3a thereof
In accordance with Article 85 of the CEOS, contract staff can be engaged for a fixed pe一
riod ofat least three months and not more than fve years. Contract Agents are engaged
for their specific competence in different areas of administration (finance; HR, IT, logistics;
legal, audit quality management), in the railway domain or to perform manual or admin-
istrative tasks。
This type of contract is usually used to meet specific needs such as:
Administrative tasks;
Coping With temporary peaks in Workloads;
Launching projects or new activities for Which long-term commitment in
terms Of staffng is unclear;
Replacing staff on long-term absences such as maternity leave, long-term sick
leave or unpaid leave;
However; increasingly ERA has also engaged Contract Agents for other (long-term) tasks;
SUChas:
Administrative and Logistician Support Agents
Assistants
Project Officers
i
Seconded National Experts(sz)
Seconded National Experts (SNEs) are staff employed by a national, regional or local pub-
lic administration Or
public intergovernmental organisation who are seconded to the
Agency so that it can use their expertise in
particular feld. SNEs are seconded from
their national employer to the Agency's operational units on the basis of their specific
competency and technical expertise in the railway domain, based on Decisionno 173 of
the Management Board of the European Union Agency for Railways laying down rules
onthe secondment to the Agency of seconded national experts and national experts in
professional training:
possibility to mandate 'cost-free' SNEs also exists; where the Agency does not pay any
allowances or cover any ofthe expenses related to the performance oftheir duties during
their secondment; although the Agency does not deploy such SNEs at the moment。
SNEs assist the Agency staff and cannot perform (middle) management duties. The initial
period of secondment may not be less than six months or more than two years. It
be
renewed once or more Up to
a total
period not exceeding four years. Exceptionally, the
Agency's Executive Director may authorise one more extension of the secondment for
the maximum duration ofone year at the end ofthe four-year period. Each secondment
and extension are subject to an exchange of letters. An SNE may be seconded once again
provided that the conditions of secondment still exist and a period ofat least six years has
elapsed between the end ofthe previous secondment and the new secondment unless
the previous secondments lasted for less than four years。
SNEs are not employed by the Agency
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUALITATIVE
83
may

Annexes
V
Trainees
Professional traineeships last 10 months and are managed in accordance with Decision N。
ERA-ED-DEC-1063-2015, depending on budget availability。
Vi
Structural service providers(s3)
At ERA, the majority Of service providers are intra muros IT consultants:
B
Appraisal and reclassifcation
promotions
Implementing rules in place
Table 25 - Implementing rules related to appraisal of performance and
reclassifcation
promotion
Topic
Model decision
Yes 
No
Reclassifcation
Model Decision
Applied by analogy since 03/31/2016
OfTA
C(2015)9560
as per AB decision (see below)
Reclassifcation
Model Decision
Applied by analogy since 03/31/2016
OfCA
C(2015)9561
as per AB decision (see below)
Model Decision
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015
Appraisal OfTA
C(2013)8985
as per AB decision (see below)
Model Decision
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015
AppraisalofCA
C(2014)2226
as per AB decision (see below)
Concerning the performance appraisals and staff reclassification and
promotions; the
Agency applies:
Decision No 132 of the Administrative Board of the European Railway Agency
On
general implementing provisions regarding Article 87(3) of the Conditions of
Employment of Other Servants ofthe European Union
Decision No 133 ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency lay-
ing down general implementing provisions regarding Article 54 ofthe Conditions
Of Employment of Other Servants ofthe European Union
Decision No 122 ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency on
the general provisions for implementing Article 43 ofthe Staff Regulations andim-
plementing the frst paragraph of Article 44 of the Staff Regulations for temporary
staff;and
Decision No 123 of the Administrative Board of the European Railway Agency
on the general provisions for implementing Article 87(1) ofthe Conditions of Em-
ployment of Other Servants of the European Union and implementing the
paragraph Of Article 44 ofthe Staff Regulations:
They were
implemented forthe appraisal and reclassification exercise Of 2016. Since
2016, the Agency adopted and implemented the rules for the reclassifcation of Contract
Agents。
Structural service providers are not employed by the Agency
84
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
frst
frst

T1. Reclassifcation oftemporary Staff
Table 26
Reclassifcation of temporary staff(s4)
Average seniorityin the grade among reclassifed staff 
Groupand Grade
Actualaverage over
Average over 5
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
5years
years(ss)
AD5
Dm
Dm
2.8
AD 6
3.3
4.3
2.9
1.9
Dm
Dm。
2.8
AD 7
2.7
4.8
4.5
4.6
Dm
pm.
28
AD 8
50
5.4
3.7
2.4
pm.
Dm
3.0
AD 9
5.2
3.8
5.6
4.5
Dm
Dm。
4.0
AD 10
4.9
58
95
Dm
Dm
4.0
AD 11
4.8
pm.
Dm
4.0
AD 12
pm.
Dm.
6.7
AD 13
Dm
Dm
AST
Dm
Dm。
3.0
AST2
3.8
4.3
Dm
Dm
3.0
AST 3
3.8
4.8
4.5
4.8
pm.
Dm
3.0
AST 4
4.3
Dm
Dm。
3.0
AST5
4.8
3.6
pm.
Dm
4.0
AST 6
3.8
3.8
Dm
Dm
4.0
AST
4.8
Dm
Dm
4.0
AST 8
58
Dm
Dm。
4.0
AST9
Dm
Dm。
N/A
AST 10(56)
Dm
Dm
5.0
AST/ISC
4.0
AST/SC 2
5.0
ASTISC 3
5.9
ASTISC 4
6.7
ASTISC 5
8.3
Reclassification exercise of 2022 not yet finalised
According to Decision C(2015)9563
(56}
Senior Assistant
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUALITATIVE
85

Annexes
T2. Reclassifcation of contract staff
Table 27
Reclassifcation of contract staff(s)
Average number ofyears
Staffin activityat
How many staff members
Average number ofyearsin 
Function Group
Grade
in grade ofreclassifed
01.01.2021
Were reclassifedin 2021
grade ofreclassifed staff
staff(58)
18
N/A
N/A
17
N/A
Between 6and 10 years
16
1.4
Between 5and
years
CAFGN
15
2.9
Between 4and 6 years
14
28
Between 3and 5years
13
2.5
Between 3 and 5years
12
N/A
N/A
NIA
Between
6and 10years
CAFGIII
10
2.9
Between 5and
years
NIA
Between 4and 6 years
NIA
Between 3and 5 years
NIA
N/A
2.4
Between 6and 10 years
CAFGII
3.7
Between 5and
years
N/A
Between 3and 5 years
NIA
N/A
CAFG |
2
N/A
Between 6and 10 years
48
Between 3 and 5years
Staff fnanced from grant, contribution or service-level agreements not included in this table
(58}
According to Decision C(2015)9561
86
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Mobility policy
Mobility within the Agency
DecisionN。 121ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency laying down
the general implementing provisions on the procedure governing the engagement and
use of temporary staff under Article 2(f) of the CEOS (adopted on 25.11.2016) and De-
cision n
210 Of the Management Board of the European Union Agency on the general
provisions for implementing Article 79(2) ofthe CEOS, governing the conditions ofem-
ployment of contract staff employed under the terms of Article 3a thereof enshrine the
scenarios for internal mobility for TA 2(f) and CA。
The Agency considers internal mobility when vacancies arise; but due to the very specific;
technical competences ofa big part ofthe staff; internal mobility remains limited。
Furthermore; members of the Agency staff can apply for vacant posts within the Agency
advertised externally。
supplementary agreement in accordance With Article 10 ofthe
CEOS will be concluded as required if existing staff geta new job.
Mobility between Union Agencies
The implementing rules on the engagement and use ofTemporary Agents 2(f) and Con-
tract Agents defne the scope of mobility between EU Agencies。
very limited number
Of the support staff Who have left the Agency in previous years have accepted TAICA
positions in other Agencies:
Increasingly staff members Who took up long-term Temporary Agent positions at the
Agency come from other EU Agencies。
Mobility between the agencies and the institutions
Some posts are filled following an external selection procedure by staff coming from other
European institutions (in particular the Commission), although the number remains small.
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUALITATIVE
87

Annexes
C.Gender representation
T1.Data on 01/09/2022
statutory Staff (only offcials; TAs and CAs)
Table 28
Data on 01/09/2022 - statutory staff only (offcials, TAand CA)
Establishment
Offcial
Temporary
Contract Agents
Grand Total
Level
plan posts 
Staff
%
Staff
% 
Staff
%
Staff
%
Administrator
level (AD + CA
29
15.596
2.79
34
18.29
FGIV)
Female
Assistant level
24
12.89
4.89
33
17.69
(AST + CA FG HIII)
Total Female
53
28.39
14
7.5%
67
35.8%
Administrator
level (AD + CA
89
47.69
18
9.69
107
57.29
FGIV)
Male
Assistant level
4.896
2.19
13
7.09
(AST + CA FG HIII)
Total Male
98
52.49
22
11.89
120
64.29
Total
151
80.79
36
19.3%
187
1009
External staff
Offcial
Temporary
Contract Agents
Grand Total
fnanced from 
Level
Grants, Contrib。 
Staff 
% 
Staff 
% 
Staff 
% 
Staff 
%
& SLAs
Administrator
level (AD + CA
0.596
0.59
0.59
FGIV)
Female
Assistant level
1.196
1.19
1.19
(AST + CA FG HIII)
Total Female
3
1.69
3
1.69
3
1.6%
Administrator
level (AD + CA
2.196
2.19
2.19
FGIV)
Male
Assistant level
0.096
0.09
0.09
(AST + CA FG HIII)
Total Male
2.1%
2.1%
2.1%
Total
3.79
3.79
3.7%
88
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Table 29
Data regarding gender evolution over 5 years ofthe Middle and Senior management(sg)
2017
2022
Managers
Number
% 
Number 
%
Female
14.39
209
Male
85.79
809
Total
100%
10
100%
0.
Geographical balance
T2.0ffcials TAs and CAs
Table 30 -
Data on 01/09/2022 - statutory staff only (offcials, TAand CA)
Nationality
AD + CAFGIV
AST + CA FGHIII
TOTAL
Establishment plan posts
Number
% oftotal
Number 
% of total staff
Number
% oftotal
Austrian
0.596
0.09
0.596
Belgian
25
13.49
19
10.29
44
23.59
Bulgarian
0.596
096
0.596
Croatian
2.196
9
2.196
Cypriot
0.59
9
0.59
Czech
0.596
0.096
0.596
Danish
1.196
0.59
1.696
Estonian
0.09
Finnish
0.596
0.096
0.59
French
17
9.196
14
7.59
31
16.69
German
4.89
0.09
4.896
Total
71.49
28.6%
1009
(59}
Staff who is defined as middle manager by the
applicable General Implementing provisions on middle management
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUALITATIVE
89
Staff
Staff

Annexes
Nationality
AD + CAFGIV
AST + CA FGHIII
TOTAL
Establishment plan posts
Number
% oftotal staff 
Number
% oftotal staff 
Number 
% oftotal staff
Greek
4.396
0.59
4.89
Hungarian
1.696
0.09
1.696
Irish
0.596
0.09
0.59
Italian
21
11.29
2.19
25
13.49
Latvian
0.09
Lithuanian
1.196
90
1.196
Luxembourgish
0.096
Maltese
0.09
Dutch
2.196
0.096
2.19
Polish
3.796
1.19
4.896
Portuguese
1.69
09
1.696
Romanian
3.796
1.19
4.89
Slovakian
0.59
0.09
0.596
Slovenian
0.09
Spanish
16
8.69
1.69
19
10.29
Swedish
0.596
90
0.596
British
5
2.796
90
2.79
Total
141
75.49
46
24.69
187
1009
Nationality
AD + CA FGIV
AST + CA FGIIII + ASTISC
TOTAL
External staff fnanced
from Grants, Contrib. &
Number
% oftotal staff
Number
% oftotal staff
Number
% oftotal staff
SLAs
French
28.69
14.39
42.996
Italian
14.396
0.09
14.39
Romanian
14.39
14.39
28.69
Spanish
14.39
90
14.39
Total
71.49
28.6%
1009
The AACC granted the Brexit exception to 5 UK Nationals as provided forin the Arts 12(2),47 and 119ofthe CEOS。
ERA may engage citizens from EEA states (Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway), but does not receive any
applications from these countries。
90
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

T3.Evolution over 5 years ofthe mostrepresented nationalityin the Agency
Table 31
Evolution over 5 years of the most represented nationality in the Agency
Most represented
2017
2021
nationality
Establishment plan posts
Number
% 
Number 
%
Belgian
38
2396
44
249
E.Schooling
Table 32 - Schooling
Noagreementisin place with a European School
Contribution agreements signed with the EC on type
European schools
No
Contribution agreements signed with the EC on type I European schools
No
Informal arrangement with EEL(M) (Ecole europeenne Lille Metropole)
Number of service contracts in place with international schools:
Description ofany other solutions or actions in place:
Informal arrangement with Jehan Froissart Primary Schoolin Valenciennes (EN curricula)
HUMAN RESOURCES 2023-2025
QUALITATIVE | 91

Annexes
Annex VI.Environment
management
Executive summary
The revised SPD guidelines(co) require Agencies to compile and formalise their Environ-
ment management policy. To achieve this ambition, the frst Environment management
annex
Was drafted in
Which ERA
summarised its commitment to higher policy
goals, the measures alreadyin place, as wellas the potential future environment
managementinitiatives and actions, taking in consideration the responsibilities ofthe
Agency as
public administration body, while keeping in mind the impact of environ-
mental initiatives on the Agency's limited human and fnancial resources. Despite these
limitations, the Agency is a socially and environmentally responsible organisation Which
pursues, whenever possible; the adoption and related implementation of environmental
measures and initiatives that can be achieved with the available means:
The Agency is committed to promote a culture of sustainability acting in a re-
sponsible and sustainable manner
see point 9 ofthe European Union Agencyfor
Reilways Policy(). Concern for the environment and promoting
a broader
sustainability
agenda are integral to ERA's professional activities and the management of the organisa-
tion. In addition; the Agency is committed to urgently respond, within the boundaries
ofits mandate and capacity; to the ongoing energy crisis。
The Agency's aim is to follow and to promote good sustainability practice;, to reduce the
environmental impacts of its activities and to help its stakeholders to do the same. The
Agencys existing environment principles(6z) are covered under the following broadertop-
icS:
Green building(e3
Climate protection
Environmental preferable purchasing
Transportation
Waste reduction and recycling
Sustainable resource management
ERAs wider work in the railway sector, including its authority and policy contribution to
fully-fledged functioning Single European Railway Area
is covered under the
Annual Work Programme; in particular Strategic Statement 2(64) and the specific project
designated to "Green agenda" (ERA1 234).
Inaddition tothe broader policy context related to the Green Deal, the Agency pays atten-
tion to the environmental impact of its day-to-day operations (ie. to its building, staff
management; administration, and functioning)。
ERAinthe broader policy context related to environment
As an Agency Of the European Union; ERA pledges to the Commissions European
Green Deal(es) initiative. Consequently; ERA commits to deliver its part of the deal to
make the EUs climate, energy; transport and taxation policies ft for reducing net green-
70
Communication C(2020)2297 final of 20.4.2020 on the strengthening of the governance of Union Bodies under
Article 70 ofthe Financial Regulation 2018/1046 and on the guidelines for the SPD and the CAAR
htps:/www era.europa.eu/sites/default/fileslagencyldocsleuropean
Union_aBency
for_railways_policy_en pdf
Currently covered in the latest Environmenta
measures implemened at ERA status note (internal, 15/03/20221
The Agency is considering
green building certification for its new headquarters building project (Certfication HQE
Haute Qualite Environnementalel
Railwill become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will
be favoured as a transport mode by the new generations"
See https://ec.europa
CU
Jinfolstrategylpriorites 2019_2024leuropean-green-deal
en
https://ec.europa.eulinfo/
strategylprioritesZolgZoz4leuropean-green-dealgelvering-eyrgpean-green-deal
en
92
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

house gas emissions by at least 559 by 2030, compared to 1990 levels
as defnedin the
EClimate Target Pln 2030(66).
Since the publication of the Communication from the Commission on the European
Green Deal(o) in December 2019,ERA has strengthened its activities aiming at promoting
the role ofthe railways in the decarbonation ofthe European transport sector. To make the
European Union the frst carbon neutral region in the world by 2050, lowering the trans-
port emissions is crucial. Between 1990and 2019, the transport emissions have gradually
increased and reached 2596 ofthe total greenhouse gas emissions ofthe EU.The transport
sector is the second sector only to the energy sector in terms of emission。
However, looking at the same period, the emissions of the railway sector have gradually
decreased and nowadays represent less than 0.59 of the transport-related emissions.In
addition, railways are also the mode oftransport with the lowest external costs (external-
ities):
ERA has
a central role in
fostering interoperability and safety of the rail transport Which
should eventually make it more attractive;, more effcient and thereby increase the modal
share ofthe railways; resulting the greenhouse gas emissions of Europes transport sector,
in line with the objectives ofthe EC Green Deal:
Figure 1 - Sustainable
mobility targets (Source: EC)
90o
reduction
greenhouse gas emissions in transport by 2050
Reducing its dependence
Making
Pricing to reflect
on fossil fuels
alternative choices available
environmental impact
(
By 2030, there will be at least
Alllarge and medium-sized cities put
The internalisation
30 million zero-emissions cars and
in place their own sustainable urban
ofexternal costs
80000 zero-emission lorries
mobility plans by 2030.
Oftransport at the latest
in operation。
by 2050 will ensure
that those who use transport

will bear the full
Costs rather than leaving others
Traffic on high-speed rail
By 2030, there will be
will double by 2030
in OUr society to meet them。
at least 100 climate-neutral
By 2050 rail freight traffic
cities in Europe。
Will double。
Scheduled collective travel
under 500 km should be carbon neutral
by 2030 within the EU。
Transport by inland waterways and
short sea shipping will increase
Zero-emission large aircraft will
by 259 by 2030.
become ready for market by 2035.
htps:llmyintracommeceurgpa.eulnewslEyrgpeandBeyonglpzesls5-Percent-emissions-cyt-planaspxl htps;ll
eCeuropaeu/Clima
eU-achon/european
green-geallzo3o-dimate-target plen
en
Communication C0M/2019/640 fina
of 11.12.2019 from the Commission on the European Green Deal
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
93

Annexes
Figure 2 - Smart mobility targets (Source: EC)
8
II
OG
Unleash full potential
By 2030, integrated electronic
By 2030, automated mobility
Ofdata_
ticketing facilitates seamless multimodal
will be deployed on large scale。
passenger transport_
Freight transport will be paperless
Figure 3
Resilient mobility targets (Source: EC)
Transport has been one of the sectors hit hardest by the COVID-19 pandemic. The EU has now an opportunity
to build a mobility system that is sustainable; smart, and resilient: a system for future generations
Building a strong and resilient
Creating a mobility system
Ensuring the highest standards
Single Market:
that is fair and just for all:
Of safety and security
in European transport:
Investment in transport infrastructure
Make mobility affordable and accessible
across the EU Member States;
in all regions and for all passengers;
2050, the death toll
for all modes Of transport
in the EU will be close to zero。
By 2050,
fully operational, multimodal
Improve the conditions
Trans-European Transport Network
for transport workers
for sustainable and smart transport
with high speed connectivity.
ERA's wider work in the railway sector, including its authority and policy contribution to a
fully-fledged functioning Single European Railway Area, is reflected in all Agency's
strategic statements Which form partofthe Single Programming Document (multi-annual
andannual parts) The targeted conceptual
work related to the Green agenda is captured
in Strategic Statement 2(68).
In 2021, ERA led by example by having been one ofthe main organisers of Europezn
Of Rail2021(69), a flagship thematic initiative of the European Green Deal。
On the highest level ERA also pledges to respect and act upon the United Nations
2030 Agenda for Sustainable_Development and the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).
"Rail
become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will
be favoured as a transport mode by the new Benerations
See https:/europa.eu/year-of raillindex
eh
https:/leceuropa.eu/commission/presscorner/detaillen/FS 20 363
94
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
By
Year
Will

Environmental impacts of ERAactivities
ERAs administrative operations related to its building(s) have direct and indirect impacts
onthe environment. ERAs impact on the environmentfalls underthe following categories:
1. Use Of electricity, including for heating and cooling; water; paperand
stationery
2. Generation Of waste and CO2 emissions (including by travelling _
Com-
muting)
3. Land use With regards to biodiversity(o)
ERA pays attention to limiting the use of resources; taking the energy crisis into account;
and minimising negative impacts on the environment。
The recent
geopolitical developments make the environmental
and in particular ener-
gy-related issues
more visible than ever before。
Accountability ceiling OfERA
ERAis committed to dothe utmost toadvance its environment management and neutral-
ise its impact on the environment. Nevertheless, it needs to be noted that due to outside
factors ERAs leverage may be limited regarding some proposed environment actions。
Current ERA headquarters building was put at the disposal of ERA by Valenciennes Metro-
pole through a rental contract. Other buildings (meeting rooms in Lille; parking) used by
ERA are rented in office buildings and parking lots, where the environment management
responsibilities and tasks lie with the property owner or manager. In the context ofthe
Covid-1g pandemic the Agency has re-assessed its approach to meetings with stakehold-
ers and has limited the use of office spaces in Lille; as well as the missions of ERA staffand
externals to Lille headquarters。
large number ofthe Agency's meetings have been held
in remote mode; thus
reducingthe carbon footprint。
Moreover; ERA's new headquarters building project has a key focus on environmental con-
siderations when setting Up specifcations and during negotiations。
The new building
project complies with the EMASIHQE recommendations。
It has to be noted that the railway link With the adjacent Belgian city Of Mons is missing for
decades, with no rail service on the section between Valenciennes and the Franco-Belgian
border Despite recent plans brought back the hope for re-establishing the connection,as
of today this condition leaves no feasible public transportation option for the signifcant
proportion Of ERA staff living in Belgium. ERA remains a vocal advocate ofrecommencing
cross-border railway operations as defned in its Strategic Statement 1("), with a particular
focus on this particular one. Nevertheless as of today, carbon footprint related to staff
commuting from Belgium to France needs to be mitigated with less desirable alternative
solutions; such as carpooling:
As per the EMAS
regulation
Commission
Reeulaton (EU)2018/2026 of 19 December 2018 amending Annex IV to
Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009on EMASI . Note: the premises have limited urban green space or accessible rooftop
to be considered for signifcant improvement of its biodiversity:
rThere willno
longer be any technical and operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail,
assets can be reused throughout Europe
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
95

Annexes
Environment managementachievements of ERAto date(z)
2022
Implementation Of SYSPER having in
View the digitalisation of formerly
pa-
per-based processes and reduce paper Use
Reduction in the number of missions and limited use ofthe Lille premises
Donation of old laptops to local charities and associations through the Mairie de
Valenciennes
2021
Introduction ofthe new SharePoint system
having in view the advancement of
DMS digitalisation and reduction of paper use
Suspension ofstaff missions and in-house ERA events, only allowing the absolutely
essential ones, when possible, organising them online instead as a consequence
Of Covid-19 pandemic
Providing ERA branded cloth masks through Better Together project (to reduce
use Of surgical masks)
Reusable water bottles provided for the participants Of the Rail Safety Days 2021
event instead of disposable cups
2020
Substitution ofthe purchase of single use plastic cups for paper cups
Participation of the Agency at the virtual EU interinstitutional Greening Network
meeting
Suspension ofstaff missions and in-house ERA events, only allowing the absolutely
essential ones; when possible; organising them online instead as a consequence
Of COVID-1g pandemic
2019
Installation Of LED lighting systems in the HQ ground floor corridor
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
2018
Refurbishment ofall meeting rooms in the ERA HQ (installation of LED lighting
systems inside the MTG A131, 8003-8005,8016,B017,and 8018).
2017
Installation of recycling stations for offces supplies in the ERA HQ
Purchase ofeco office
supplies and LED desk lamps
Communal areas ofthe HQ refurbished with eco-friendly material
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
2016
Installation of recycling stations in the HQ
Replacement of old fridges with new ones consuming less energy
Deployment of power off scripts for laptops left powered on
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
Based on the Environmental measures implemented at ERA status note (internal) , complemented with other
achievements
96
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

2015
2. Implementation ofrecycling and sustainable purchases via two catering contractors
3. Recycling workshop from the French local authorities to explain the recycling in
France organized by FM attended by colleagues within ERA (23/04/2015)
2014
Installation ofthe recycling station at the canteen, plastic cup collection station;
plants in the reception and library, installation of recycling bins in the meeting
rooms at the headquarters
ERA started the gradual introduction of paper orders that have environmentally
friendly label (Ecolabel/Blauer Engel), and also labelled FSC. By today ERA purchas-
es products labelled "FSC Recycled" (manufactured with 1000 recycled fibre of
Which at least 85 percent is PCW recycled material).
Environmentmanagement initiatives and planned actions for
2023-2025
Methodological notes:
The actions listed in the sections below Which require a budget envelope Will start With a
budget estimate as
0 pre
-requisite. Budget availability will be assessed for those actions
before proceeding with the implementation。
|
Depending on the interest expressed for the volunteering group referred in part l,this group
can assist with other actions listed in parts A-.
川
While some ofthe units/teams are referred in the column of
responsibilities by the nature
oftheir role in the organisation, the successful implementation ofthe strategy relies on the
ownership and involvement ofall staffmembers。
A
Consumption of resources (energy & utilities)
ERA collects and analyses information related to the consumption of
electricityand water。
Pareto analysis ofenergy consumption will be conducted to pinpoint the critical points
to concentrate on and put efforts in frst. Based on this information, ERA will identify any
possible action to decrease the consumption.
List ofactions:
Action
Target 
Coordinator
Reducing temperature in the building as agreed/recommended by French authorities;
immediately
RSU/FM
with no possibility for additional electric heating devices
Repair/replace faulty sensors to solve lights always on in some offices
immediately
RSU/FM
Reduce/stop heating and cooling in underutilised spaces, allow for settings
012023
RSU/FM
management at office level
Adjust auto-off settings of lights, reducing light level whenever possible; add manual
switches for"hard off" (not even activated with motion sensor), consider lights
0
2023
RSU/FM
beyond working hours
Remove some neon tubes and/or replace them with LED
022023
RSU/FM
Internal communication campaign to limit the use of energy draining devices; to
unplug and switch off devices before leaving the office; to use multiple screens only
012023
EXO/SAC(3)
when needed (or meeting rooms)
Continue to procure green energy
ContinUOUs
RSU/FM
(7}
Explanationin
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), staff involvement in environmental issues
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
97
Off

Annexes
8
Reduction of carbon footprint related to staff commuting
ERA to analyse the provision of local public transport passes to staff
startingin 2023。
ERA Will analyse analogous schemes at Commission and other Agencies and evaluate the
feasibility Of providing local public transport passes to staff (Or retrospectively reimburs-
ing staff for these passes) to further encourage staff to use public transport and thereby
reduce their carbon footprint. The budget impact of such initiative should be properly
factored。
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Carpooling module in SharePoint
Q22023
RSU/IT
Purchase of bike repair station (orrepair Kit with pump)
022023
RSU/FM
Internal communication campaign to incentivise cycling to work
022023
EXOISAC
Electric Vehicle
charging (carand bike)
022024
RSU/FM
Development of a teleworking regime that requires less office space (e.g. hot
in line with COMreg
RSUIHR
desks; rotational schedules)
See under section Fbelow
C
Green public procurement(4)
ERA to further improve its procurement by implementing green public
procurement by the end of 2023. ERA to advance green public procurement
by promoting the use and order of'green offce items" from the EC offce
supplies' catalogue。
Calls for procurement tenders ofrelevant goods and services should include "Environmen-
taland social contribution" among the technical evaluation criteria
decommissioned
furniture disposallre-use; recycling policy, donations). An "environmental impact state-
ment" will be written in the initial proposal for procurement and specifc; robust environ-
mental criteria, and "environmental considerations" will be included in the calls for pro-
curement tenders of relevant goods; and services include. Tenderers will have to comply
with these criteria and considerations to qualify for a contract. It is planned to become
standard ERA practice to build environmental considerations into procurement for rele-
Vant goods and services:
European Commission- Green Public Procurement: https: Lec eurgpa eylenvropmentlgpplingex
enhzm
98
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
(e9.

D
Carbon footprint reductionand management of missions;
meetings and events
ERA will promote and utilise the Commissions quidelines ongrganisinq
Sustainable meetingsandevents;It willimplement MIPS module of
Sysper to replace MiMa and will compile regular reports on travel-related
emissions starting from 2023. ERA will amend its travel policy to encourage
environmentally friendlier itineraries。
ERA
adheres
to
Commissions_guidelines
On
Organising_sustainable
meetings_ang
events(5), and commits to promote the guidelines and incentivise to its staff to apply the
steps When organising meetings and events:
Step 0: Is a physical meeting/event necessary?
Step 1: Is the venue sustainable enough?
Step 2: Is the printed and promotional material sustainable?
Step 3: Are the 3Rs
applied? (Reduce; Recycle and Reuse)
Step 4: Is the catering sustainable?
Step 5: Are the accommodation and transport environmentally friendly?
Step 6: Have social aspects been considered?
Step 7: Are you sharing environmental awareness?
The Agency could strengthen the recommendation for internal and external attendees
to select train transportation where convenient connections are available; or airtravel op-
tions With smaller carbon footprint
more direct flight routes; less connections) In
addition, travel policy and related internal communications will repeatedly emphasise to
ERA staff that online meeting forms should be preferred and picked over travel intensive
face-to-face meetings whenever feasible and expedient。
E
Further reduction of paper and stationery consumption
ERA will continue to fully digitise Workflows.It will further reduce the
printouts of publications. In the limited cased of printers' use, ERA will
maintain the use of eco-friendly
partially recycled A4 printing paperas
 default printing medium. It will introduce on-demand stationery supply
instead of stationery "welcome package"
ERA Will advance further digitalisation of the Agency, including the replacement Of pa-
per-based processes with electronic workflows and other IT systems -
in cooperation with
the Commissions DG DIGIT
Such as:
SYSPER (full rollout)
Microsoft SharePoint and Office 365: office solutions for paperless document cre-
ation and storing (full rollout)
Ares: document management and archiving system
ERA Will continue to reduce the number of printed (paper-based) publications through
close management ofthe communication & publication plan. ERA Will increase the use of
On
demand ofits publications/materials and web publishing:
ERA Will raise awareness among its Staff to on further possibilities of moving towards pa-
perless office. As part of it, instead of the usual stationery "welcome package" offce sup-
plies will continue to be stored in
designated office and colleagues will be invited to
collect strictly What they need
on demand。
New release: https /Jec.europa.eu/environmentlemas/emas for Vou/news/news84
enhtm
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
99
(e9
print

Annexes
F
Waste generation reduction, sorting and recycling
ERA will maintain
orif possible; improve
the selective recycling and
waste collection arrangements in its current building; as wellasin the
new
building. ERA will order offce supplies and merchandise onan on-
demand basis only, with preference to sustainablelrecycledleco-friendly
distributable merchandise。
ERA Will make sure that selective waste collection remains widely available in offces and
common areas ofthe current
building and undertakes to provide for the same in the new
building. In the form of internal communication, ERA Will raise awareness among its staff
about these recycling arrangements。
Moreover; ERA has a partner to recycle decommissioned ITequipment。
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Procure and distribute ERA-branded reusable water bottles for staff to reduce disposable
022023
EXO/SAC
CUD USe
Install containers for reusable discarded items (e.9. coffee capsules/pads, stationery)
032023
RSU/FM
Replace bottled water at events with alternative; less waste generating means (e9一
EXO/SACOr
distributing ERA-branded reusable water bottles, order of returnable bottle products
012024
RSU/FM
with a deposit fee)
Include recyclable packaging in the criteriaof the catering contract
Contr renewal
Procurement
6。
Reduction of offce space need
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Teleworking rules; including clear criteria for requesting full time presence on premises;
in line with COM
RSUIHR
depending on the service needs
reg.
Flexible offce arrangement in the new building
in line With new
Discontinue Lille offce rental when the current contract expires
RSU/FM
HQ project
Hot desk arrangements
升
Use ofavailable green space, greening of the offces
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Campaign about composting(o)
022023
AAM
Design in the new building: planting native and high CO conversion capacity plants;
in line With new
installing vertical garden
RSU/FM
HQ project
Propagation Of indoor vertical gardens in the new building
https: /Lww valenciennes-metropole fr/competences /developpement-durable /dechets /composteurs /
100
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), staff involvementin
environmental issues
List ofactions:(T)
Action
Target 
Coordinator
Periodical intervention at General Assemblies to inform staff about environmental topics
042022
CAP
Set-up Of ERA Environment (Volunteering) Group to drive dissemination actions; collect
012023
CAP
ideas and push forthe progress of environment actions
Annual CSR activities organised to staff (e.9.tree planting, garbage collection, social
Volunteering
volunteering) and incentivising teams to choose "responsible"team-building activities
Q22023
Group
Better
with added environ/social value
Together
Promote events at the level of ERA staff; such as: "green week" "green
Or"greener
032023
EXO/SAC
offce contest
Currentstatus and plan for certifcations and standards
ERA does not hold a certifcation for
ofthe
environmentlenergy management stand-
ards
EMAS ISO
4001 HOE JQ50001). However, especially in the context ofthe new
building project; ERA pays particular attention to the requirements listed in the respective
standards. The new building is planned to be EMAS
HQE certifed.
Subject to resource constraints
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
101
day"
any
(e.9.

Annexes
Annex VI。
Building policy
Currentbuilding(s)
Table 33
Current building(s)(78)
Surface Area (in m)
Rental contact
Building
Conditions
Host 
nameand
Location
Duration
Breakout
attached to the
country
Offce space
Non
Total 
Rent (E/year)
ofthe 
Type
Clause
breakout clause
(grant or
type
offce 
(79)
contract 
support)
YIN
(iapplicable)
ERAHQ
120re Marc Lefrancg
5,250 m? (802
N/A
5,250mz
486,942.69
year with
Office rental
N
N/A
00
59307 Valenciennes FR
tacit renewal
Lille Offce
299 Boulevard de Leeds
Until
meeting premise
Espace
373.98 mz
54.90 mz
42888 mz
94,105.40
N/A
n0
59000 Lille FR
31/12/2023
rental
Inerational
Parking des
Tertiales
SPL
Rue du Fera Cheval 59300
100 parking
year with
3
26,250E
parking rental
N
N/A
n0
Valenciennes
Valenciennes; FR
places
tacit renewal
Stationnement
Espace
13 Avenue le Corbusier
Until
parking place
2,689.56E
parking rental
N/A
几0
International
59800 Lille FR
31/12/2023
5,678.88 mz +
Total
5,623.98 mz
54.90mz
609,987.65E
101 parking
Notes:
1. ERA HQ (Valenciennes): ERA is the only tenant in the ERA HQ building, the Agency exclusively occupies and uses alloffce and non-offce spaces in the building. Therefore, all surface area is included
underthe 5 250 mzof offce space (SHON, terraces are not considered):
2 Lille Office- Espace International (Lille): ERA shares office spaces with the building landlord (CCI de Region) on the 2nd floor Following the signature of the addendum n%3 to main Lease contract
that entered into force as of 01/09/2022, the leased total office space is reduced to 428.88 mz for a lease fee of
673.81E, where the "quote-part des parties communes" is 12.80%. ERA
has an exclusive use of the "office space" (81) Of the 428.88 m? considered in the rent, the remaining 12.80% included under "non-office" (82
are shared with the landlord and othertenants_
Table as Of 31/12/2021
to be updated in due Course
HT = hors taxe (excluding tax), as Of 2021.
SHON = Surface Hors Cuvre Nette (Net Surface Areal, see https: //WWW service-public frlparticuliers /vosdroits /F2868.
The net Office space being used exclusively by the Agency; namely the reception, cafeteria, meeting rooms, offices, circulations, storage
technical rooms, copy corners inside ERA closed space
Toilets
sanitary installations, storage
technical rooms and circulations located outside ERA closed space and
being shared with other occupants, including building common areas located on the
floor main reception (parking
places are not consideredj.
102
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
84,E
ground

Building project in the planning phase
Due to the growth ofthe Agency, the current building in Valenciennes does not offer any
longer the required conditions to accommodate staff and activities related to the Agen-
Cy's role as railways' Authority. Therefore; the Agency has re-allocated the majority ofstaff
members in double office spaces as a short-term solution. Another short-medium term
solution is the implementation Of teleworking up to the limit set by the Management
Board Decision on Teleworking:
In parallel, as part ofa long-term solution, the Agency and Valenciennes Metropole have
started defning the requirements for a new building to accommodate ERA activities after
2027 by means ofa Study composed of different phases. In 2018,the Phase
ofthe Study
confrmed that the current ERA HQ cannot accommodate all requirements related to the
Agency activities and growth。
In 2019 and 2020, the Agency has managed to complete the Phases 2 and 4 ofthe tech-
nicaland functional study resulting in the approval of the technical specifications that will
be used as the base for the selection ofarchitects in the Phase 3 ofthe Study。
Taking into account the experience gained during the pandemic with large-scale tele-
working and new Ways of working, the building capacity Was revised,and the technical
project adapted.
The main objective for the Agency during 2021 was to prepare the technical and fnancial
dossier to be formally addressed to the EU Budgetary Authority for the fnancing ofa new
building:
In 2022, following the approval of the project, it is foreseen that Valenciennes Metropole
Will launch a "Concours" (Contest
CFT) for the selection ofthe Architect as part ofthe
Phase 3 ofthe Project。
Building projects submitted to the European Parliamentand the
Council
See status under previous section:
BUILDING POLICY
103

Annexes
Annex VIIl. Privileges and immunities
The Management Board approved the proposed Headquarters (or Seat) Agreement between the Agency and the host Member State without objections or negative votes in August 2018.
The Seat Agreement between the French Government and the Agency has been presented as draft legislation to the French National Assembly on 7 July 2021 (84) and has been adopted
and promulgated on 31 January 2022.The fnal text ofthe Seat Agreement can be found here(e). The following table presents the privileges granted to the Agency's staff:(86)
Table 34 - Privileges granted to staff
Privileges granted to staff
Education /
Agency privileges
Protocol of privileges and immunities
diplomatic status
Care 
The Agency's headquarters are located in Valenciennes and Lille. The French authority
The HQ Agreement differentiates statutory staff (offcials; TAs, CAs) and external staff
No provision
pledge to provide the necessary support to ensure the location ofthe Agency's
(SNEs, experts, trainees, interims) (Art. 1).
in the
headquarters will remain unchanged. (Art. 3)
The privileges and immunities provided forthe statutory staff aim to guarantee their
headquarters
independence and the unimpeded functioning of ERA. The Executive Director and the
agreement。
Please refer
The Agencys premises are inviolable, exempt from perquisition, requisition;
statutory staff (Art. 10):
to AnnexV
confscation orexpropriation. No French authority can enter the building without
enjoyimmunity from jurisdiction, even after the termination oftheir mission, in respect
[.
Schooling
the prioragreement ofthe Executive Director. The property and assets ofthe Agency
ofacts carried out by them in the exercise of their functions
for further
cannot be subject of legal measure of constraint without the authorisation ofthe CJEU.
are exempt from national taxes on earnings, salaries and respective supplements paid
information on
(Art. 4)
by the Agency
education。
the exemption for themselves and their spouses from measures restricting
The Agency's archives and all official documents are also inviolable. The Agency will
immigration and from aliens' registration formalities;
beneft from the same treatment the French Government provides to diplomatic
enjoy the same privileges in respect of currency and exchange regulations comparably
missions when it comes to official communication. No restriction can be placed on
to those accorded to staff of international organisations
neither offcial communication addressed to the Agency or a member of its personnel,
noron
communication emanating from the Agency. In addition, the Agency shall
the right to import duty-free their furniture and personal effects at the time of
have the right to use codes and to dispatch and receive offcial correspondence and
frst taking up their post in France and the right on the termination oftheir functions in
other official communications by courier orin sealed bags which shall be subject to
France to export free of
their furniture and personal effects, subject in both cases
the same privileges and immunities as diplomatic couriers and bags. (Art. 5)
to conditions considered necessary by the French authorities
https://wwwera.europa.eu/sites/default /files/agency/docs/decision/decision
n180
headquarters_agreement
between_agency
and host
Sate
en
pdf
Assemblee Nationale
https:Jwww assemblee-nationale frdyn/l5/textes/l1564323
projet-loi
Senat
https:
WWWsenatfrdossier
Jeistflllz2288 hml
https:
WWW assemblee-nationale fr/dyn/l5/textes/l1564323
accord-internanonalpdf
http:IWww senat frTrap/21-365/121-3651.html
104
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
day
enjoy
enjoy
any
duty

Privileges granted to staff
Education /
Agency privileges
Protocolof privilegesand immunities
diplomatic status
care
The Agency is entitled to display the flag ofthe EU,as wellas its own on its premises
Enjoythe right to import duty-free their private car acquired whetherin the country of
and vehicles (Art. 6)
their last residence orin the country of which they are nationals; bound by the single
The Agency, its assets, income and other properties; shall be exempt from all direct
market rules
also enjoy the right to export it duty-free; subject to the conditions
taxes. The Agency is also exempt from indirect taxes and duties included the price
considered necessary by the French authorities;
of movable and immovable property and services, acquired for its official use and
Have access
along With their family members
to access without discrimination
involving an expenditure of at least E1 50.The exemption may be granted by way ofa
compared with French citizens to all public services provided on French territory
refund. The Agency shall also be exempt from all custom duties and any other taxes for |including medical services, education, childcare; and housing:
all goods intended for official use; as long as this exoneration is foreseen in the EUor
national legislation. (Art. 7-8)
The French Government will deliver to all members ofthe Agency's personnel (expect
those who have the French nationality or permanent residency) a special residency
Finally, the Agency is entitled to register three vehicles with diplomatic plates. (Art. 9)
document identifying them as member ofthe Agency's personnel The Agency will
ensure that once an
employee leaves the Agency, its residency document is handed
back to the Ministry Of Foreign Affairs. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs also facilitates
the issuance of those residency documents and work authorisations to the family
members ofall the Agencys personnel, expect those Who have the French nationality
OI
permanent residency (Art. 11 (1,2).
The French authorities will take all necessary measures to facilitate the entry; stay, and
departure of experts in missions for the Agency on the French territory. Necessary Visa
sand authorisations Will be delivered for free as quickly as possible (Art. 11 (2,4).
In addition, the Executive Director and the statutory staff are exempt from any
compulsory national social security system. External staff; SNEs, and their family
members; subject to their coverage in their own country of citizenship, are also exempt
from any compulsory national social security system. (Art. 12)
PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
105
day
They

Annexes
Annex IX. Evaluations
The Agency has a system in place to monitor its performance and formalise an evaluation
ofthe results achieved in the year into the SPD dashboardas an ongoing tool, as well
aS
through the Consolidated Annual Activity Report which focuses on the achieve-
ments of indicators and targets set out in the SPD:
The following instruments are used for collecting the data and for triggering actions:
Work progress reports, filled in by projects and service managers reporting the
status Of projects and services against the relevant plans, budget and human re-
sources allocation
including SPD targets。
Budget execution monitoring, a continuous activity based on a daily automat-
ed report fed with SUMMA data, displaying the level of appropriations; commit-
ments and payments to date for each budget line and for each project/service
Monthly budget review meetings with the Management Team to analyse the
data from the budget execution monitoring and take timely decisions for deploy-
ing
redeploying the resources. The redeployment of resources is brought to the
attention ofthe Management Board for information ifthe transfers are within one
title or between titles but below the 109 threshold or for decision ifthe transfers
are between titles and above the 109 threshold.
IMS internal audits, part ofthe internal monitoring programme aimed at verify-
ing that processes; projects, services and products comply with internal and exter-
nal
requirements, including:
IASaudits
ECAaudits
Non-Conformity register; Where deviations from the relevant rules and provi-
sions are recorded
Allthe sources listed above allow the Agency governance bodies, namely the Manage-
ment Team and the Management Board to monitor continuously the functioning of the
Agency. In order to allow this;, the Agency has developed a performance dashboard
Which is turning the data into meaningful information.
The dashboard provides fgures, charts and visuals about:
Human resources:
Total No.of statutory staff members
No.Ofstatutory staff members per type of contract:
Contract Agents
Temporary Agents
Seconded National Experts
Trainees
No.Of statutory staff members per unit
No.Ofstatutory staff members per unit and type of contract
Geographical balance
Gender balance:
Global Agency gender balance
Gender balance in the management team
Gender balance per type of contract
106
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Budget management:
General budget overview as per Single Programming Document; including:
EU contribution
EFTA contribution
Fees and Charges
Foreach budget title:
Envelope
Amount paid
Forecasted revenues (Title 4 only)
Agencys authority tasks:
No.ofapplications:
Single Safety Certifcate:
Submitted
On-Going
Issued
Vehicle Authorisations:
Submitted
On-Going
Issued ERTMS Track-side Approval:
Submitted
On-going
Initial engagement completed
No.of hours pertype of process
Single Safety Certifcate:
Actual
Forecasted
Vehicle Authorisations:
Actual
Forecasted ERTMS Track-side Approval:
Actual
Forecasted
Projects and services:
Budget:
Arbitrated project budget; from the current budget year (C1) and the pre-
Vious one (C8)
Difference between arbitrated budget and current budget allocation
Expenditure
Human resources:
Work:
Baseline Value
Planned
Actually spent
Status:
Overall statUs
Quality
Risks
Schedule
Riskof missing the SPD targets
EVALUATIONS
107

Annexes
Terminology(8)
The following terms are used in the SPD -
in accordance with the Commission guideline
onevaluation:
Strategic Statement(
is a coherent area ofaction With objectives and resources.It is
the basic building block for the structure ofthe annual Work Programme; distinguishing
between operational activities
directly related to the mission and core tasks ofthe agen-
CY, and horizontall cross-cutting activities
carried out to support
operational activities
and staff
Objective describes What the agency wants to achieve either in the short or long term.
Indicator is
a characteristic or attribute that is measured regularly in order to assess to
what extent an objective has been met。
Baseline is the point of reference against which achievement or progress towards objec-
tives is measured。
Milestone is an intermediate target set; expressed in quantitative or qualitative terms;
measuring progress towards the achievement of long-term objectives。
Target is the ultimate desired situation, quantifed and timed.
Inputs are the human and fnancial resources used and the time
required to produce
OutPUts
Actions are the Work carried out over a certain
period oftime; consuming resources and
producing outputs in accordance with the objectives set.
Qutputs are What is directly produced or supplied through the agency intervention. They
often relate to the expected deliverables of the intervention and are identifed based on
is operational objectives。
Qutcome is the envisaged medium to long term effects ofa programme or policy out-
put. While its results are not easily foreseeable and might not be entirely in the sphere of
control of the Agency; the outcome represents an intermediate medium-term step be-
tween the agency' outputs and longer-term societal impacts. The Agency has structured
its multiannual work programme according to desired outcomes to ensure allof its out-
puts Will contribute positively to its vision & ambition。
Results are the direct effects ofintervention(s) on the target groups:
Impacts are the indirect or long-term effects ofan intervention on the EU or global socie-
tythat are; at least partly, expected to be influenced by agency's interventions。
Communication C(2020)2297 fnalof 20.4.2020 on the strengthening of the governance of Union Bodies under
Arfcle 70 ofthe Financial Regulation 2018/1046 and on the guidelines for the SPD and the CAAR, C. Terminology
Referred to as 'Activity" in former SPDs
108
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Annex X. Strategy for
the organisational
managementand
internal control
systems
The strategy gives an overview on how the internal control system is organised and is
contributing to the mitigation of the risks to the achievement of Agency's objectives to
acceptable levels。
The Agency is operating based on a management system designed to provide reasona-
ble assurance regarding the achievement ofthe five internal control objectives derived
from the Agency's Financial regulation as wellas ensuring continuous improvement and
the need to implement a flexible and effective governance. The management system is
implemented through four high-level components
Strategic, (ii) Core; (ii) Supportand
(iv) Measurement and improvement. Each component is including all 17 principles ofthe
Internal Control Framework (ICF). There is also a clear link with the internal components of
the ICF (i.e. control environment risk assessment; control activities and monitoring). This
system is deployed further at the levelof processes。
The roles and responsibilities for implementing the system are integrated as follows:
The Management Board represents the Member States, and the institutional stakehold-
ers has
strategic role on budgetary and planning matters: It is overseeing the internal
controls and risk management ofthe Agency. It ensures that the Agency fulfils its mission
and performs the tasks assigned to it
The Executive Director (ED) in its capacity Of Authorising Officer (AO) and under the SU-
pervision of the Management Board is ultimately responsible for the management ofthe
internal control framework. The ED sets the tone at the tope and puts in place structures
and processes to gain reasonable assurance that the system is operating effectively。
The heads of unitsldepartment in their capacity OfIAuthorising offcer by delegation
(AOD) must ensure that the internal controls are efficient and effective in their area ofre-
sponsibility as per AO delegation of powers. Both AO and AOD in their capacity Of process
owners are responsible for continuous improvement ofthe processes
The newly created function of manager in charge of Risk managementand internal
control is fulfilled by a middle manager. It oversees the monitoring the implementation
ofthe internal control arrangements and for complete and accurate reporting on the Op-
eration and effectiveness of the internal control framework. This function is also in charge
offacilitating the risk management process:
The accounting offcer certifes the year-end accounts thus providing reasonable assur-
ance thatthe accounts present a true and fair view ofthe fnancial situation ofthe Agency。
AIlstaff should ensure at their own levelof competency that their activities comply with
rulesand
regulations and report any deficiency:
The delegations of powers for executing the budget are detailed in internal procedures:
The implementation of the budget is done via projects and services Which is reflected in
STRATEGY FORTHE ORGANISATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
109

Annexes
empowering project and service managers in managing the associated risks and resourc-
es without
prejudice to the AOIAOD powers。
The IAS is the internal auditor of the Agency and performs independent assessment on
the internal control systems based on a three-year plan. Complementary; internal audits
are
performed. The external audit is performed by the European Court of Auditors (for the
legality and regularity oftransactions) and an external company (for the accounts).
Internal controls tools include:
Controls performed atall levels of the Agency
Risk management; in particular at project/service level and Agency level where
the most
signifcantlrelevant risks are captured including strategic risks (recorded
in the agency/corporate risk register and reported in the CAAR). Risks are formally
assessed at both inherent and residual level to make sure that the analysis ofthe
effectiveness ofthe controls in place is ensured before additional mitigating meas-
ures are put in place (cost-effectiveness of controls).
Corrective/preventive measures are established when recurrent and systemic er
rors are recorded. Ex-ante nonconformities involving signifcant amount of money
(>15.000 euros) are approved by the AO
Internal control monitoring criteria for measuring the presence and the function-
ing ofthe principles are in process of being developed considering the risk envi-
ronment and are focused more on effectiveness and effciency。
Follow-up ofrecommendations from ECA, IAS, Discharge authority as wellas other
sources (e.9.external evaluations) to ensure that the actions plans are effectively
implemented within the agreed deadlines:
An integrated reporting system to inform and alert management on the progress
on the implementation of costs for each projectlservice as Well as SPD outputs
(monthly dashboard). The cost data is connected to the source (SUMMA).It in-
cludes several other parameters such as risks, issues, changes corrective actions
taken; quality, milestones etc.
Budgetary status reports are produced on
daily basis including an overview
per unit of the budget execution per budget line for all fund sources, financial
information on commitments, payments and transfers, information on progress of
planned procurement and contracts. The information helps achieving the perfor-
mance targets in these particular areas。
Ex-ante controls consisting in several checks of fnancial and operational aspects
oftransactions by the actors involved in the fnancial circuits. There is a
Com-
prehensive checklistltemplates as wellas guidance which ensure an effective level
Of control. The specific controls are detailed in the manual of fnancial procedures
Which also included the steps to be taken for making a fnancial transaction, the
Various fnancial circuits by type oftransaction and the different roles and responsi-
bilities. The Agency is putting substantial efforts in updated these manuals/check-
Jists。
Ex-post controls for payments not subject to an ex-ante verifcation. The material-
ity criterion defned by the AO/AODs for drawing
a reservation in the CAARis an
assessment of whether more than 29 ofthe payments ofthe activity concerned
is erroneoUs
Sensitive function policy defnes the management of functions involving a consid-
erable amount of autonomy and executive powers with the aim of ensuring that
actions are taken to mitigate the risk that the jobholders deliberately misuse their
decision-making powers orinfluence With a view to gaining personal advantages
110
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Very

Ad-hoc controls are additionally applied at the level of processes whenever the
management assesses it is necessary to mitigate a
specifc risk (e.9. selection pro-
cedures, fnancial delegations).
The Agency's anti-fraud strategy has been developed in accordance with OLAF guidelines;
it is setting clear objectives; actions and responsibilities and it is based on
standalone
fraud risk assessment exercise adapted to the Agency's environment encompassing fraud
risks regardless of their criticality. The risk Of fraud is duly considered when carry out the
risk assessment exercise
The strategy is focusing on three objectives:
Handle effectively actual or perceived conflict of interest;
Enhance the promotion Of high ethical values as well as increasing fraud aware-
DeSS
Enhance data and information security
The objectives are fully aligned with the fraud risks identifed which include inherent sig-
nifcant risk of confict of interest due to specifc circumstances ofthe Agency's activities
(i.e.regulatory powers With signifcant decision making powers and potential reputational,
legaland fnancial consequences if conflict ofinterest not adequately managed; relatively
limited 'market' for recruitment of staff as wellas for entities Which could provide services
forthe Agency), potential risk of cyber-attacks leading to operational damage, loss ofdata,
unauthorised disclosure of information or breach of data; potential risk of outsourcing the
data and information security without proper security risk assessment); risk of staffmem-
bers not being fully aware of their ethics obligations as Wellas handling and reporting
fraud. The Agency has put in place comprehensive control measures proportional to the
levelof risks and amount of risk identified which encompass (but not limited to) manda-
tory tailor-made trainings on ethics and separately on antifraud for all staff; mandatory
submission of declaration ofinterests forall staffand members ofthe Management Board
and ofthe Board of Appeal, ex-postlon the spot controls; review of internal procedures
(including procedures for reporting and handling fraud). Control indicators enable assess-
ment ofeffectiveness of the measures taken_
Starting 2023, the Agency converges the following activities under a single service
(Internal Management and Control System .
ERA.1158) to better supportthe assur-
ance function:
1.The internal management system coordination
the successor ofthe previous IMS
service; from which the ISO certifcation component was dropped, While the focus
is placed on the ICF further implementation and monitoring;
2.The internal control coordination;
3.The central fnancial verifcation;
4.The contact point for IAS, ECA and EP discharge follow-up:
Assessment of the effectiveness of the management system
The agency monitors continuously the efficiency and effectiveness ofthe Internal Control
Framework。
yearly assessment report is produced where consideration is given to the
results of controls mentioned above:
AlIthe internal control components and principles
must be present and
functioning well at all levels of the Agency to be considered effec-
tive. The results ofthe assessment are reported in the CAAR.
STRATEGY FORTHE ORGANISATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
111

Annexes
Annex Xl. Plan for grant; contribution,
Or
Service-levelagreements
Table 35
Grant, contributions, or service-level agreements
Generalinformation
Financialand HRimpacts
Date of 
Camount 
Duration
Counterpart
Short description
2022
2023
2024
2025
signature
(EUR)
Grant Agreements
48 months
Continuation of pre-accession support to
Amount (EUR)
133,149
0(90
1.IPA (2019/410-
04/12/2019
450,000
01/01/2020
DG NEAR
the EU candidates and potential candidates
Ne OfCAs
319)(89)
31/12/2023
Western Balkans and Turkey)
Ne Of SNEs
2. EUMedRail
72 months
Implementation ofthe action EUMedRail
Amount (EUR)
441,487
(ENI/2020/359-
31/12/2016
2,000,000
01/01/2017
DG NEAR
EuroMed Rail Safety and Interoperability
Ne OfCAs
727)
31/12/2022
Project
Ne OfSNEs
Amount (EUR)
574,636
Total Grant Agreements
Ne OfCAs
Ne OfSNEs
Contribution Agreements
System Pillar
45 months
Amount (EUR)
250,000
250000
Dm
Dm
Provide a fnancial contribution to fnance the
(MOVE/C4/
15/07/2021
750,000
16/07/2021
DGMOVE SRD.3
implementation ofthe action ERA support to
Ne OfCAs
pm.
SUB/2021-454/
01/05/2025
the Railway System Pillar
Ne Of SNEs
512.852702)
Until the
Amount (EUR)
10,000
Federal Offce of
Signature ofa
Admin. Arrangement between the Swiss
Ne OfCAs
2.Access to OSS
13/12/2019
20,000
Transport (FOT)
Cooperation
Federal Office ofTransport and ERA(9)
of Switzerland
Ne Of SNEs
Agreement
Extension of the grant agreement to 2023 under negotiation。
Full amount received by the end of 2022. However; due to the project extension to 31/12/2023 the remaining E 192,464 will be spentin 2023.
(91}
exchange of the access granted by the Agency to the OSS, the FOT accepts to pay 3 service fee, payable annually。
112
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Generalinformation
Financialand HRimpacts
Date of
Samount 
Duration
Counterpart
Short description
2022
2023
2024
2025
Signature
(EUR)
Amount (EUR)
260,000
250,000
Dm
pm.
Total Contribution Agreements
Ne OfCAs
Dm
Ne OfSNEs-
Service-Level Agreements
Amount (EUR)
1.N/A
Ne OfCAs
Ne OfSNEs
Amount (EUR)
Total Service-Level Agreements
Ne OfCAs
Ne Of SNEs
Amount (EUR)
834,636
250,000
pm。
pm
Total
Ne ofCAs
pm
Ne of SNEs
PLAN FOR GRANT, CONTRIBUTION, OR SERVICE-LEVEL AGREEMENTS
113

Annexes
Annex XII. Strategy
for cooperation with
third countries and/
Orinternational
organisations
Since the adoption of the existing strategy for global cooperation (together with SPD
2018), the Agency is updating the scope of work in order to best address the priorities
listed by the European Commission in this feld, namely:
The EU transport policy aims at promoting greater development and stability in the neighbour
ing countries, enhancing connectivity with the neighbouring areas and towards Asia,and cre-
ating alevel-playing feld forinternational rail transportand the rail supply industry beyond EU
borders: The Commission welcomes Agencys aspirations to provide technical support at Com-
mission request。
Commission reminds that the main priorities as regards rail international
cooperation fall into EUs neighbourhood, strategic partners and high growth economies be-
neighbourhood,and international organisations. Agencys international activities should
notgo beyond:
114
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
The
yond

Annex XIIl. Procurement plan
Table 36 - New procurement procedures to be launchedin 2023
Title
Description 
Ne OfSNEs
Market ceiling 
Type of Contract
Event putting the skills gap in Railways and Women in
Conference on European Yearof Skills
25,000.00E
Direct contract
Transport in the foCUs
Innotrans is the leading international trade fair for transport
technology and takes place every 2 years in Berlin. ERA
InnoTrans sqm and AUMA fees
50,000.00E
Direct contract
participates as an exhibitor in 2024. Sqm must be booked
one year before the event。
Details included in the Communication and Dissemination
Conference Energy Effciency
25,000.00
Direct contract
Plan.
Details included in the Communication and Dissemination
Conference on Multimodal Transport
25,000.00E
Direct contract
Plan.
Interpretation services
'simultanee, consecutive; chuchotee'
Services dinterpretation
are required for meetings/ events organized by the Agencyin
830,000.00e
Framework Contract
France (mainly Valenciennes and Lille) orabroad。
PROCUREMENT PLAN
115

Annexes
Table 37
Planned usein 2023 of existing framework contracts
To be committedin
Use Of FRAMEWORK CONTRACTS 
2023 (estimated)
Local Identifer
User Reference
Expiry Date
PMO contract
AMEX GLOBALBUSINESS
Travel Agency services (missions)
31/03/2024
100 OOO EUR
TRAVEL
ERA 202107 FWC
Catering services
Valenciennes)
08/
2/2025
30 000 EUR
ERA 201836 FWC
ASSISTANCE ERTMS TRACKSIDE APPROVAL
28/04/2023
30000 EUR
ERA 201902 FWC
Interpretation services
12/08/2023
125 OOO EUR
ERA 201906 FWC
ESP-EISDG
Offsite IT services
28/07/2024
000 0OO EUR
ERA 202102 FWC
Consultancy support on Vehicle Authorisations applications
06/01/2026
350000 EUR
ERA 202203 FWC
DEVELOPMENTOF TRAINING PRODUCTS FORTHE EU AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS KNOWLEDGE HUB
31/08/2026
85 OOO EUR
ITCONESMA 202202
ESMA ICTConsultancy
8/10/2026
250 0O0 EUR
SCIC/C1/2018/FWC/02
SCIC EVENT MANAGEMENT SERVICES
LOT2
23/07/2023
360000 EUR
OC_EFSA_COM_2019_01 LOT 2-01
DEVELOPMENTOF STATIC AND INTERACTIVE INFORMATION AND STORYTELLING PRODUCTS
22/06/2024
70 OOO EUR
OC_EFSA_COM_2019_01 LOT 1-01
DEVELOPMENTOF INTEGRATED COMMUNICATION CAMPAIGNS
10/05/2024
90 OOO EUR
116
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Annex XIV.。
Strengthening
Action Plan (SAP)
2023-2027
1.Context
In 2022, the Agency's Management Board adopted the Strengthening Plan prepared by
the Agency in close cooperation with the European Commission. The purpose of the
Strengthening Plan is to make the strongest possible case in order to strengthen the
Agency with resources matching the levelofambition necessary for achieving the
important EC policy objectives for rail, in an effective and effcient manner and
beneft from high levels of ambition and effciency within ERAS structure and
methods。
With the document serving as a basis for the internal EC budget negotiations in 2022, the
Agency received a proposed increase of 12 TAs in 202292. While the additional TA allocation
is lower compared to the request from the Strengthening Plan (12 TAs proposed out ofthe
22 TAs requested), it can offera
basis for the Agency to proceed with the implemen-
tation ofthe Strengthening Plan。
A Very important
challenge is represented by the fact that the additional TA allocation
needs to be
covered under the existing subsidy envelope. To make best use Of this
TAallocation and considering the external constraints related to the indexation of salaries
and prices; the Agency is making a thorough assessment Of its capacity tO cover these
Costs in a sustainable manner until the end of MFF 2021-2027. Several measures are envis-
aged, suchas the time-phased hiring ofthe TAs. The budget constraint on the subsidy side
is therefore an element to be properly monitored and managed for the whole remaining
period ofthe current MFF
The current document describes the plan of actions Which the Agency will putin place in
the period 2023-2027 in order to implement the Strengthening Plan taking into consid-
eration the level of additional staff allocation proposed by the EC.It is hereinafter referred
as SAP (Strengthening Action Plan) 2023-2027. This builds on actions already taken up to
present to increase the efficiency of the support services and tools:
2. What we want to achieve
ERA has established an outcome-driven framework placing strong emphasis on effec-
tiveness (i.e."doing the right things"), in line with the prioritisation of activities included in
the Strengthening Plan.In parallel, a delivery structure based on Projects and Services has
been established. Outputs of projects and services are followed up and measured using a
dashboard approach。
With the Strengthening Plan, we willimplement a series of improvement actions that
should enable to achieve the most appropriate outcomes With the resources available。
This is important not only to justify the additional resources requested by the Agency, but
also in orderto demonstrate that European taxpayer's money is used in the most effective
92
6 TAs are expected to be phased out by the end Of MFF 2021-2027
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
117
good
fully

Annexes
Way, So that the European railway system can develop towards attractiveness, efficiency
and
sustainability。
Improvement actions will be assessed according to their impact as wellas ease ofimple-
mentation. Quantitative targets are defned (mainly related to the respective FTEs) and fol-
lowed up/measured on
regular basis. The baseline is ERA SPD 2022 and the monitoring
tools are ERA SPD Portfolio Management together with the SPD Dashboard developed
already。
3. Objectives, actions, indicators, and targets
The SAP 2023-2027 mirrors the Strengthening Plan and translated it into concrete actions。
Itis based on the planningand monitoring framework and enablers already set up
bythe Agency, Which includes:
the multi-annual planning in the SPD, with a clear focus on the intervention logic;
the Agency's performance dashboard, including reporting to the EB and the MB
the regular budget execution monitoring and reporting
the Consolidated Annual Activity Report。
The annual work programmes Will therefore be aligned to the priorities listed in the SAP
which represents an anchor for the multi-annual planning in what the priority policy areas
are concerned.
direct tracking Of SAP-related FTEs, outputs and targets will be includes
in the SPDs:
The SAP 2023-2027is
organised along the following components/objectives:
a.)
Drive an optimal resourcing of policy priority areas, matched by proportional out-
puts and outcomes, including effciency gains
b) Maintain proper resourcing and further efficiency gains for the authority tasks
Ensure a reduction in the Agency's administrative FTE allocation While maintaining
regularity and legality
d)
Ensure the overall projected FTE evolution by 2027
Ensure effective and effcient budget management (planning and execution),ap-
propriate risk management
118
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

A.Ensure an optimal resourcing of policy priority areas, matched by proportional outputs and outcomes, including effciency gains
Note: In addition to the balanced inputloutput ratio for the priority areas, efficiency=
are also embedded and measured with the same indicators. The latter represent the delivery of relatively
more (ambitious) outputs for the same amount of effort compared to previous years。
Action
2022
Target
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
202393
2024
2025
2026
2027
Al. Ensure proper
A1.1. No.of FTEs allocated
input/output for NSA
001MRA1116
4.62
4.93
(annual Values)
monitoring
A1.2.No.of NSA audits
performed per
Report after 2
Follow-upof
A1.3. Proper learning from the
Follow-upof
issued with
Optimised scope
Optimised scope
defciencies
NSA monitoring
defciencies ensured
recommendations fora
implemented
implemented
ensured
new MB decision
A1.4 Audit at the Member
Referential to be
State level, ie. covering more
startedatthe end
than just the NSA Activities in
ofthe 2nd NSA
the MS 95
Monitoring cycle
A1.5 Assessment of NSA
Pilot during the
To be includedin
To be included
To be included
supervision activities Of RUs
To be included in the
2ndyear ofthe 2nd
the NSA monitoring
in the NSA
in the NSA
where the Agency has issued
NSA monitoring audits
audits
monitoring audits
monitoring audits
the SCS
A1.6 "Monitor"NSAsin EU
To be started at the
accession countries (synergies
ERA.115197
endofthe 2nd NSA
with IPA grant and TCT) after
IPA countries accession"
Monitoring
A1.7 Combine large scope
To be started at the
NSA monitoring audits and
endofthe 2nd NSA
more
targeted audits (e9.
process audits)
monitoring cycle
93
For 2023 we Work with the assumption that all 12 additional TAs are distributed across the priority areas; however, a correction factor (0.5) needs to be applied to the additional TA work capacity hired in 2023 (in terms Of FTE), which corre-
sponds to the late hiring during the year. The numbers included in the 2023 column are already calculated with this correction factor
94
This indicator captures the speed of progress with organising the NSA audits;
complementing indicator is included in the SPD to measure the number of reports issued.
95
This could probably be done less frequently i.e. a longer audit cycle: G-year cycle, or even longer, ortargeted only to MSs where we encountered severe issues during the NSA monitoring which could not be addressed at the NSA level but rather
at the Member State level。
96
Not to replace the NSAs supervision, but to assess the performance of NSAs While carrying out supervision activities (e.B. follow up type 3 issues by concerned NSAs)
97
Subject to the extension ofthe IPA grantin 2023
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
119
gains
yearg4
Cycles
Cycle
Cycle

Annexes
Action
2022
Target
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
202393
2024
2025
2026
2027
A2.Ensure proper
A2.1 . No.of FTEs allocated
input/output for
OOOMRA1138
4.01
(annual Values)
NoBo monitoring
A2.2
No.of NoBo audits
performed peryear (full
8-9
15
15
20
20
20
monitoring cycle in 3 years =
20 NoBos/year)98
A2.3. Learning from NoBo
Organised whenthe
monitoring/ Forum of best
1st audit Cycle is at
practices
anadvanced stage
A2.4
Anew common
framework for NoBos, DeBos
Final draft agreed
and AsBo assessment and
First concept
With ECas a basis for
monitoring set up by the
drafted
a future
legislative
Agency (new legal base may
proposal
be needed)
A2.5
"Knowledge hub"to
To be started at the
promote best practices and
end ofthe 1st NoBo
train NoBos (widening it to EU
audit cycle:
accession countries)
A3. Ensure proper
input/output for the
ERA1218
A3.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERTMSand radio
10.35
11.22
13
13
13
13
(annual values)
ERA-REC-129
communication
eVolution
43.2. Expertise provided to
ECin the standardisation
Work related to FRMCS, ATO;
Provision by 2025 in TSI
innovation (satellite-based
ifinput is provided via
system for train positioning;
System Pillar
enhanced onboard
signaling etc )- integration of
enhancements in CCSTSI
98
This indicator measures the speed of progress with organising the NoBo audits;
complementing indicator is included in the SPD to measure the number of reports issued。
120
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Action
2022
Target
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
202393
2024
2025
2026
2027
A3.3.Support forthe
EU-wide deploymentof
Requests Of CINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
ERTMS , including economic
Requests OfCINEA- DG
DG Move 1009
DG Move 10096
DG 1009 Move
DG 1009 MoVe
impact analysis to inform
Move 10096 assessed
assessed
assessed
assessed
assessed
possible public investment
prioritisation (e.9. by CINEA)
A3.4 CCS TSI Maintenance and
Publication ofCCS
Update CCS
Update CCS TSI with
operational activities for CCS
TSI Application
TSI with error
error corrections
Framework
guide
Corrections
roadmap
roadmap
A3.5 review OfESC/RSCand
ESCIRSC roadmap
roadmap implemented
implemented as
implemented as
roadmap for reduction
proposal
35
planned
planned
planned
ERA.1175
A4.Ensure proper
ERA.1177
A4.1. No.of FTEs allocated
input/output forthe
4.5
5.94
(annual Values)
ERA.1246
TSIs related work
ERA.1172
Harmonised
A4.2. Lessons Learned
CCM process
implemented in CCM process
implemented
Implementation
Provisions in TSIby
A4.3.CRDAC
Droposal
2025
Unique
Specifc Cases for
A.4.4.CR Unique Authorisation
Authorisation for
Coaches
Vehicles
AlInew EN referred
A.4.5.CR Standards
TO EN updates
TO EN updates
TO EN updates
TO EN updates
toin TSIanalysed
A.4.6.CR Virtual Specifcation
Closed
A.4.7.CRTSIINF Cleaned-Up
1st Draft
Final Draft
A.48.CR Battery/Hydrogen
Closed
trains
A.4.9.CR Structural composite
Closed
materials
A.4.10.CR Platform/Train
Closed
interface
A.4.11 CR Noise of parked
Closed
trains
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
121

Annexes
Action
2022
Target
Indicator
PIS code 
baseline
202393
2024
2025
2026
2027
A.4.12.Energy measurements
Closed
A.4.13.CR RIV/Dangerous
Closed
goods
A.4.14 CCM ready for
CCM ready byend
CCMimplemented
CCMimplemented for
CCMimplemented
CCMimplemented
processing System Pillar input
of02
forall requests
allrequests
forall requests
forall requests
Drafting
A4.15. Monitoring
implementation
Supportto MS
and facilitating the TSI
template fnalised
for drafting
implementation
MS implementation |implementation plan
study developed
A.4.16 TSIs as global standards
International
International Strategy
Strategy
1st Draft
Final
A.4.17. Support to EC (TO/
Advice/Derogations/ NoBos)
1009
1009
1009
1009
1009
within agreed deadlines
A.4.18.Increased
New structure/
Phased
Phased
Phased
Phased
harmonisation of operations
approach defned/
implementation of
implementation of
implementation of |implementation of
defne new structure forTSI
agreed
new structure
new structure
new structure
new structure
OPE
A4.19 CRon Rear-end signal
Closed
A4.20 TSI Dissemination
Workshops
A5. Ensure proper
input/output for
A5.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1172
4.28
7.36
78
7.8
78
78
the clean-up of
(annual Values)
ERA-PRG-006
national rulesgg
A5.2
NRs to include in TSIs
CRs introduced
339 CRs Closed
669 CRs Closed
1009 CRs Closed
A5.3. Increased performance
1009 of planned
1009 ofplanned
1009ofplanned
1009of planned
ofand trustin MS as control
1009 of planned MS
MS assessed (incl
MS assessed (incl.
MS assessed (incl
MS assessed (incl
level
assess NSR set Up
assessed (incl.impact
impact of earlierTO
impact of earlierTO if
impact ofearlier
impact ofearlier
in MS (incl.impact OfTO,if
ofearlier TOifrelevant)
irelevant)
relevant)
TOifrelevant)
TOifrelevant)
relevant)
99
In 2023, the Agency and the EC are putting together
practical implementation plan to address the acknowledged need for harmonisation in assessing and cleaning all the categories of rules (vehicle, Fl, safety/operational. Once agreed , the
milestones of this plan will be reflected in an update of the indicators for SAP 2023-2027 and SPD 2024, respectively。
122
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025

Action
2022
Target
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
202393
2024
2025
2026
2027
A5.4.Increased performance
Draft new regulation
OfSMS
draft new regulation
Draft new
Develop guidancel
and develop
Delivertraining
Delivertraining
for harmonisation ofType 5
regulation
training
NSR
guidance/ training
AG.Ensure proper
input/output for the
A6.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1219
3.5
4.18
5.5
5.5
5.5
5.5
CSMASLP work
(annual Values)
stream
Implementation of
A6.2. Management ofthe
GOA meetings
Managementof
Management of
GoA workplan during
Management of GOA
Group of Analysts (GOA)
chaired
GOA
GOA
CSM ASLP phase
SAI/ SIS/ ERAIL
Beta Version
WOrkfIows integrated
A6.3. ISS development
2nd version on-line
fnalised and tested
1st version online
Operationand
Operation and
Operation and
Operation and
A6.4.ISS operation
maintenance
maintenance
maintenance
maintenance
Recommendation
On
Appendix C
Recommendation on
A6.5. CSM development
Technical Opinion
Appendix D
Simplifcation of
CSI/CST
On
Appendix
Updated according
to the lessons
learned
User support for
User support for
User support for
User support for
User support for
A6.6.CSMimplementation
implementation
implementation
implementation
implem:
implem。
Guidance on Safety
Guidance on
A6.7 CSM guidance/ training
performance
ISS functioning
Training delivered
Training delivered
Training delivered
published
published
100
It is important that a dedicated source Of funding be identified for the business description and the setting Of the ISS tool, as well as the support for the Group Of Analysts; in the absence of that, the outputs of the work from the CSM ASLP work-
stream risk to be Iost
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
123

Annexes
Action
2022
Target
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
202393
2024
2025
2026
2027
Normal: GOA
Normal: GOA
Normal: GOA
Normal: GOA
Normal: GoA proposal
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
ERA follow-Up report
A6.8 GOAIJNS
follow-Up report
follow-up report
follow-Up report
follow-Up report
Fast track: GoA
Fast track: GOA
Fast track: GoA
Fast track: GOA
Fast track: GoA
proposal
Droposal
proposal
Droposal
proposal
A7. Ensure proper
input/output forthe
A7.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1227
3.44
7.32
7.32
6.22
5.5
5.5
digitalisation of
(annual values)
ERA.1226101
Agency's registers
A7.2.Migration plan forthe
individual registers to a linked
data approach, including
Draft migration
Migration plan
the standardization of
plan prepared
fnalised
terminology through the ERA
terminology_
A7.3. Migration of registers to
knowledge graph approach
2596
5096
759
1009
(no code needed anymore)
A7.4. Progress with the
Specifcations
specifcations for multi-leg
fnalised
ticketing
A7.5.Agency becoming a
Proposal for EC
Workflows putin
registration entity for vehicles
decision sent
place accordingly
at EUlevel
A7.6. Exploratory work for
Eurocontrol for railways;
Draft concept paper
Final concept paper
including the traffic
developedand
agreed with EC
managementand economic
discussed with EC
regulation aspects
101
ERA1226 is included in the services
contributing to the policy
specifically through their workstream on digitalisation, excluding the daily running of the registers_
124
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
Boal

B.Ensure sustainable resourcing and further efficiency gains forthe authority tasks
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
81.1. No.Of FTEs allocated VA excluding CTT
11.7
11.7
11.7
11.7
11.7
81.2.No.of FTEs allocated VA CTT
4.8
4.8
4.5
4.5
81.3. No.of FTEs allocated SSC
5.2
5.1
4.9
4.8
48
81.4. No.of FTEs allocated ERTMS TA
1.51
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
81. Ensure sustainable resourcing
forthe authority tasks
81.5. Proportion Of FTEs allocated to authority tasks
7596
7596
7596
759
759
Which are billed
81.6 Overall FTEs redeployed
authority to
policyareas
cumulative values compared to
3,87
4.21
4.51
-4.91
-4.91
2022 baselineloz
82.1. Internal mid-term review ofthe matrix
Mid-term review
Follow-up actions
organisation supporting authority tasks (including
82. Ensure a 1st review ofthe
performed
implemented
AD/CAIAST split)
authority related processes
82.2. List of identifed improvements for a future legal
List consolidated
List consolidated
framework update to be provided to the EC
and shared with EC
and shared with EC
C.Ensure a reductionin the Agencys administrative FTE allocation
Note 1: This objective is referred to the administrative FTE allocation, but encompasses
Wide scope (e.g. redeploying administrative posts to operational activities, redeploying technical staffwho
currently cover administrative tasks to operational tasks activities).
AlIreferences are to FTEs (not posts) to allow for counting savings andlor redeployments which account for partitions of one FTE。
Note 2: The sequencing is thought as follows:
Creating the capacity of potentially free FTEs through process leaning, including automation
as such; this does not account for a materialised saving, but is a pre-condition (step
C2)
i
Identifying the opportunities to materialise that capacity -
this can
happen at contract end points (step C3)
i.
Having the FTEs freed from administrative work needs to be followed up by their actual redeployment in operational areas (step C4)
102
This reflects the re-visited assumptions for the use Of ERA FTEs for VA, SSC, ERTMS TA compared to 2022 and also embeds
component of efficiency gains through simplification/automation of processes。
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
125
from

Annexes
Action
Target
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
C1. Process/deliverable/job
C1.1. Workload analysis forall processes (operational
Delivered
Updated
related workload analysis
and support) based on a consistent methodology。
C1.2. Workload analysis at job level
Draft
Finalised
C2. Creating room for
C2.1. % of previously documented processes leaned,
209
209
209
209
2096
administrative FTEs capacity
including through automationlo3
C2.2.% ofnewly documented processes leaned by
design,as part of the Agency's management system
10096
1009
1009
1009
1009
linked to ICF
C2.3. No.Of FTEs saved by leaning secretarial, HR, I,
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
fnancial services and administrative functions linked
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
to operational work
C2.4.No.of FTEs saved from optimising the Agency's
portfolio (clustering P/S, separating between genuine
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
S and processes; resorting to off-the-shelf IT products
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
etc)
C3.
Materialising the FTE capacity
C3.1. Noof administrative FTEs not replaced
after
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
gained
retirement; invalidity procedure; leaving the Agency
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
etc)
C4. Redeploying the capacity to
C4.1.Training programme for the Strengthening Plan
operational activities
put in place as part ofthe Agency's Learning and
SetUp
Maintained
Maintained
Maintained
Maintained
Development plan
C4.2.No.ofadministrative FTEs retrained through the
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
SPtraining programme, redeployed to operational
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
activities
C4.3. No.of technical FTEs directly redeployed from
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
administrative tasks to technical Work Withoutthe
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
need fortraining:
C5.Overall FTEtarget part C (non-
-0.5
-1.25
-0.5
cumulative annual targets)
103
Baseline should be defined as a first step_
126
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
(e9.

D.Ensure the projected FTE evolution by 2027
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
D1.Control the FTE trend
01.1. No.of additional FTEs deployed to policy
evolution by 2027
priority areas
cumulative Values compared to 2022
+11.23
+17.92
+15.82
+14.10
+14.10
baseline (based on part Aabove)
D1.2.No.Of FTEs redeployed from authority to policy
tasks
cumulative values compared to 2022 baseline
-3,87
-4.21
-4.51
-4.91
-4.91
(based on 81.6 above)
D1.3.No.Of FTEs gained through effciency measures
cumulative Values; calculated based on the annual
-0.5
-1.75
-2.25
-3.25
-4.25
Values from C5104
01.4. Re-assessment of the additional FTE needs for
Preparedand
policy activities
agreed with EC
01.5. Gate way review ofthe targets
Done
Done
01.6.Input provided to EC for the next MFF
Provided
negotiations
future Railway Package
E.Ensure effective and effcient budget management
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
El. Effective budget management
E1.1. % of subsidy appropriations committed
Min. 989
Min. 989
Min. 989
Min. 989
Min. 989
Max. 109 forT1
Max. 109 forTI
Max. 1096 forT1
Max. 109 forTl
Max. 109 forT1
E1.2.% of carry forward to the next year
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 30% fOrT3
Max. 30% fOrT3
Max. 309 forT3
Max. 309 forT3
Max. 3096 fOrT3
E1.3. Salary gap structurally addressed
Done
Done
Done
Done
E2.1. Real term savings in the support expenditure
E2. Efficient budget management
29
29
29
29
29
(IT FM)
104
This trend is based
on the assumptions on FTE evolution for authority tasks as listed in line 81.6. Should the trend evolve in another direction, there will be
need to revisit the targets for 81.6,C5 and D1.1in a coordinated manner。
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
127
any

Annexes
4. Governance and monitoring arrangements
The SAP 2023-2027 is endorsed by the Management Board and steered by the HoU CAP
underthe coordination ofthe ED。
dedicated Task Force is put in place forthe period 2023-2027 to support the Action Plan
implementation composed of:
HoU CAP (Oana Gherghinescu)
CAP team members
Thomas Willems; Koen Favyts; Marta Lenarcik Andrei Lixan-
dru)
representative by unit, selected and nominated by the corresponding HoU, fol-
lowingan internal call for expression of interest (organised in Sep 2022)
Heads of Units/Heads of Departments will be accountable for their respective contribu-
tions. The involvement ofthe individual members in the Task Force is envisaged on a part
time basis, in addition to their daily tasks at the Agency。
Regular reporting is envisaged as follows:
Internal
regulariterations With the Agency s Management Team
A dedicated section willbe set Up as part of the SPD Dashboard to monitor the
progress ofthe indicators listed in Chapter 2 ofthis document byyear of reference
The SPD Dashboard is presented at every regular EB and MB meeting, Which offers
the possibility to MB members to regularly monitor the progress with the action
plan implementation
gate review with the Management Board can be envisaged
tWO years tO
make the necessary updates to the Action Plan, depending on the evolution in the
internal and external context ofthe Agency.
Annual reporting as part ofthe CAAR
Synergies With the Better Together and the HR strategy work streams will be carefully en-
sured bythe Task Force。
5.Risks
The following risks are identifed and assessed according to the matrix below:
likely
5
5
2
3
4
5
Likelihood of
Possible
2
3
4
4
consequence
Unlikely
2
2
3
4
3
3
unlikely
Negligible
Minor
Moderate
Signifcant
High
Impact
They will be monitored and addressed as part of Agencys risk register。
128
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
every
Very
Likely
Very

Budget related
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
The Agency is carefully monitoring the budget execution to strike the optimal use of
1.The Agency might not be in the position to hire all 12 TAs in 2023 due to subsidy
the existing resources in the spirit of sound fnancial management; while flagging early
constraints. The inflation trend poses signifcant pressure on the Agency's capacity tO
warning signals in case of subsidy gaps . We will react by an agile approach; having
coverthe
costs in the absence of suffcient additional EU subsidy。
reserve lists in place but only conclude employment contracts when the budgetary
means are available:
2.The revenues from Fees and Charges are not underthe full control ofthe Agency:
In particular the volume of work can fluctuate due to seasonal trends during the year;
but also more structurally, upwards
the need for re-certifcation following DAC
deployment; go-everywhere trains etc ) or downwards
starting with the second
round of safety certifcation for the same RU at ERA , the complexity ofthe issues and
checks might drop compared to the frst round) _
Human resources and internal communication related
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
3. The changes in the working patterns, together with the fnancial consideration for
hiring at lower grades, might limit the attractiveness for the specialised technical jobs
offered by the Agency in the future This might hamper the business continuity, talent
pool retention and by consequence; Agency's capacity to deliver the technical outputs
envisaged in this plan。
4.Inherent internal communication sensitivity around the choices made as part of
The Agency will indeed tackle this aspect with attention, by highlighting and
the action plan (non-replacement; redeployment etc ).In addition, given this internal
supporting the opportunity of ensuring career paths from administrative tasks to
redeployment; the pressure on legally binding administrative tasks Will increase
operational tasks. Natural end-of-contract gate reviews Will be used.
exponentially。
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
129
salary
(e9:
(e9.

Annexes
Output related
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
5. With insufficient additional resources for the policy tasks, up to the full level ofthe
need, the Agency might not be in the position to support the ECin responding to
all standardisation areas linked to innovation over the next years. The allocation of
additional resources might need to be reopened during the lifecycle ofthis Action Plan
t0
identify priority areas for Which the Agency's involvement is further expected:
6.Considering the complexity of the training program which could help redeploying
administrative staff to operational tasks, it might have a limited
in andlor efficiency
and could require a period oftime for completion which
beyond the timeline of
the Strengthening Plan
Other
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
7.In 2021, the Agency received a grant for its System Pillar workstream. While the
Ensuring a multi-annual continuity ofthe contribution agreement and an internal
provides the Agency With 3 FTEs to cover forthis Work until May 2025. In the absence of
coordination ofthe system
work directly linked to the Railway System activities
an extension there is a risk of business continuity for this stream ofactivities
(ERTMS, TSIs, Safety).
130
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2023-2025
buy
goes
grant
pillar

Gettingin touch with the EU
In person
Alloverthe European Union there are hundreds of Europe Direct
information centres. You can fnd the address ofthe centre nearest YoU at:
https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/contact_
en
Onthe phone or by email
Europe Direct is a service that answers your questions about the European Union.
YoU can contact this service:
by freephone: 00 800 678 91011 (certain operators may charge forthese calls)
at the following standard number: +32 22999696 Or
by email via: https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/contact_en
Finding information about the EU
Online
Information about the European Union in allthe official languages ofthe EU
is available on the Europa website at: https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/index_en
EU publications
You can download or orderfree and priced EU publications at:
https:/lpublications.europa.eulen/publications. Multiple copies offree publications
may be obtained by contacting Europe Direct or your local information centre
(see https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/contact_en)。
EU Iawand related documents
Foraccess to legal information from the EU, including all EU law since 1952 in all the offcial
language versions; 9o to EUR-Lex at: http:/leur-lex.europa.eu
Open data from the EU
The EU Open Data Portal (http:/ldata.europa.euleuodplen) provides access to datasets
from the EU. Data can be downloaded and reused forfree; both for commercialand
non-commercial purposes。

European Union Agency for Railways
120 rue Marc Lefrancq
BP 20392
FR-59307 Valenciennes Cedex
Tel +33 (0)327096500
era.europaeu
Twitter@ERA_railways
Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe railway
system without frontiers。
EUROPEAN
Publications Office
UNION
of the European Union
AGENCY
FORRAILWAYS