Single
Programming
Document
2024-2026
EUROPEAN
CUROPEN
UNIOI
UNION
RGENRIWAYs
AGENCY
FOR RAILWAYS

Manuscript completed in November 2023
Neither the Agency nor any person acting on behalf ofthe Agency is responsible for the use
Which might be made of the following information.
Luxembourg: Publications Office ofthe European Union, 2023
PRINT
ISBN 978-92-9477-447-7
doi:10.2821/070059
TR-02-23-130-EN C
PDF
ISBN 978-92-9477-448-4
doi:10.2821/358723
TR-02-23-130-EN-N
Photo credits: @ hanohiki (cover), Petair (page 13), franz12 (page 16),
Henlisatho (page 66)
stockadobecom
European Union Agency for Railways; 2023
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. For any use or reproduction of individual
photos or illustrations; permission must be sought directly from the
copyright holders。

Contents
List ofacronyms_
Foreword by the Executive Director
Mission statement
General context
13
1
Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
16
Multi-annual work programme 2024-2026 _
Structure ofthe multi-annual programme 2024-2026.
17
Content ofthe multi-annual programme 2024-2026 -
18
Human and fnancial resources
outlook forthe
2024
2026 _
34
Overview ofthe past and current situation.
34
Outlook for the years 2024
2026.
35
Resource programming forthe
2024
2026.
36
Strategy for achieving efficiency gains.
3
Negative priorities
decrease of existing tasks。
38
川:
Annual Work programme 2024
39
Executive summary
40
Activities。
Strategic statement
There Will no longer be anytechnical and operational
barriers to the free movement of people and goods
by rail, assets can be reused throughout Europe.
41
Strategic statement 2
Rail will become the backbone that supports an en-
vironmentally sustainable multimodal transport Sys-
tem and will be favoured as a transport mode by the
new generations。
47
Strategic statement 3
Rail traffic Will become seamless and Maas (Mobility
a5
Service) and Laas (Logistic as
Service) wil
be
ensured, including multi-leg ticketing:
47
Strategic statement 4
Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure mode of
transport forits users and workers:
49
Strategic statement 5
Rail Will be resilient and agile in responding to emer-
gency situations。
53
Strategic statement 6
Rail will become increasingly economically competi-
tive as a modeandas a Sector。
54
Strategic statement
The EU will become the global reference for railand
ERAauthorisations Will be globally recognised:
56
Strategic statement 8 - The Agency
ensure an effective and effcient gov-
ernance ofits portfolio of activities in order to offerthe
best Value for money to citizens and business in the
EU
58
Strategic statement 9 -
The Agency Will ensure
performant working envi-
ronment based
On
high-quality motivated human
resources and a collaborative behaviour.
63
CONTENTS | 1
years
years
Will

IV.Annexes..
66
Annex |.Organisational chart _
Annex Il. Resource allocation per activity 2024
2026
69
Annex Ill. Financial Resources 2024-2026
70
|1. Revenue_
70
「2. Expenditure.
72
「3. Budget outturn and cancellation ofappropriations .
76
Annex IV. Human Resources 2024-2026
quantitative 
77
/T4.Staff population and its evolution: overview ofall categories of staff.
77
「5. Multi-annual staff policy plan 2022-2026._
79
T6. Recruitment forecasts 2024 following retirementlmobility or new
requested posts _
8
Annex V. Human Resources 2024-2026
qualitative _
A. Recruitment (engagement) policy .
B.Appraisal and reclassifcation
promotions
85
C.Gender representation .
D.Geographical balance。
E Schooling
Annex V. Environment management_
93
Executive summary.
3
ERAin the broader policy context related to environment.
93
Environmental impacts of ERA activities _
6
Accountability ceiling OfERA.
6
Environment management initiatives and actions completed in 2023 _
97
Environment management achievements Of ERA until 2022
98
Environment management initiatives and planned actions _
Current status and plan for certifcations and standards _
02
Annex VIl. Building policy
year 2024 _
03
Current building(s).
103
Building project in the planning phase.
04
Annex VIIl. Privileges and immunities。
05
Annex IX. Evaluations。
107
Terminology 0
08
Annex X. Strategy for the organisational management and internal
control systems.-
09
Annex XI. Plan for grant contribution, or service-level agreements
12
Annex XII. Strategy for cooperation with third countries andlor
international organisations 
14
Annex XIII. Procurement plan.
15
Annex XIV. Strengthening Action Plan (SAP) 2023-2027 .
18
1. Context
18
2.What We want to achieve。
8
3.Objectives, actions; indicators, and targets.
19
4.Governance and monitoring arrangements
130
5. Risks。
130
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

List ofTables
Table 1
Human resources 2022-2024
34
Table 2
Revenues 2022-2024
34
Table 3
Expenditure 2022-2024 
35
Table 4
Financial resources
Outlook 2024-2026.
36
Table 5
Human resources
Outlook 2024-2026
36
Table 6 - Number of posts for each organisational entity
68
Table 7
Resource allocation 2023
2026
59
Table 8
Overview ofrevenues
70
Table 9
General revenues
70
Table 10
Overview on additional EU funding.
Table 11
Additional EU funding: grant, contribution and service-level
agreements。
Table 12 - Expenditure.
72
Table 13
Commitment appropriations (EU contribution) 
73
Table 14
Commitment appropriations (Fees and charges)
74
Table 15
Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations
76
Table 16 
Establishment plan posts .
77
Table 17
Additional external staff expected to be fnanced
grant
contribution or service-level agreements
78
Table 18 
Structural service providers
78
Table 19 - Interim Workers
78
Table 20 -Temporary Agents。
79
Table 21
Contract Agents.
80
Table 22
Seconded National Experts
80
Table 23
Recruitment forecast
8
Table 24
Implementing rules in place
82
Table 25
Implementing rules related to appraisal of performance and
reclassifcation
promotion
85
Table 26 -
Reclassifcation oftemporary staff。
86
Table 27
Reclassifcation of contract staff
87
Table 28 -
Data on 31/12/2022
statutory staff only (offcials, TA and CA).
89
Table 29
Data regarding gender evolution over 5 years ofthe Middle
and Senior management ()
90
Table 30
Data on 31/12/2022 - statutory staff only (offcials, TAand CA).
90
Table 31 - Evolution over 5 years ofthe most represented nationality
in the Agency-to be updated.
92
Table 32
Schooling 
9
Table 34
Privileges granted to staff_
105
Table 36 
New procurement procedures to be launchedin 2024
115
Table 37
Planned use in 2024 of existing framework contracts。
117
LISTOFTABLES
from

List ofacronyms
AD
Administrator
AMOCS
Acceptable Means of Compliance
A0
Authorising Officer
AOD
Authorising Officer by Delegation
AR
Agency Regulation
ASLP
Assessment of Safety Level and Performance
AST
Assistant
ATO
Automatic Train Operations
BoA
Board of Appeal
CA
Contract Agent
CAAR
Consolidated Annual Activity Report
CCM
Change Control Management
CCS
Control Command and Signalling
CEOS
Conditions of Employment of Other Servants
COR
Common Occurrence Reporting
COVID-19
Coronavirus pandemic (SARS-CoV-2)
CSIs
Common Safety Indicators
CSMs
Common Safety Methods
CSTs
Common Safety Targets
CUI
Common User Interface
DAC
Digital Automatic Coupler
DG BUDG
Directorate-General for Budget
DGDIGIT
Directorate-General for Informatics
DGMOVE
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport
DG NEAR
Directorate-General for Neighbourhood and Enlargement
Negotiations
Dol
Declaration of Interest
EASA
European Union Aviation Safety Agency
EB
Executive Board
EC
European Commission
ECA
European Court of Auditors
ECM
Entity in Charge of Maintenance
EFTA
European Free Trade Association
EMSA
European Maritime Safety Agency
EPSO
European Personnel Selection Offce
ERA
European Union Agency for Railways
ERADIS
ERA Database on Interoperability and Safety
ERATV
European Register of Authorised Types ofVehicles
EU RailJU
Europes Rail Joint Undertaking
ERSAD
European Railway Stations Accessibility Database
ERTMS
European Rail Traffc Management System
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

ESG
Economic Steering Group
ESO
European Standardisation Organisation
ETCS
European Train Control System
EU
European Union
EUAN
EU Agencies Network
EVR
European Vehicle Register
FFR
Framework Financial Regulation
FM
Facility Management
FRMCS
Future Railway Mobile Communication System
FTE
Full Time Equivalent
FWC
Framework Contract
GSMR
Global System for Mobile Communications (Railway)
HOF
Human and Organisational Factors
HQ
Headquarters
HR
Human Resources
IAS
Internal Audit Service ofthe Commission
ICC
Internal Control Coordinator
ICF
Internal Control Framework
ICT
Information and Communication Technologies
IM
Infrastructure Manager
IMS
Integrated Management System
INEA
The Innovation and Networks Executive Agency
IOA
Inventory Of Assets
IPA
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance
IRSC
International Railway Safety Council
ISO
International Organisation for Standardization
ISS
Information Sharing System
|
Information Technology
JNS
Joint Network Secretariat
J
Joint Undertaking
KPI
Performance Indicator
LaaS
Logistic as a Service
Maas
Mobility as a Service
MB
Management Board
MFF
Multiannual Financial Framework ofthe European Union
MS
Member State ofthe European Union
MT
Management Team
NIB
National Investigation Body
NOBO
Notifed Body
NSA
National Safety Authority
NTRs
National Technical Rules
NVR
National Vehicle Register
OSJD
Organization for Co-operation between Railways
OSS
One-Stop Shop
OTIF
Organisation for International Carriage by Rail
PCP
Priority Countries Programme
LISTOF ACRONYMS
Key

POE
Poolof Experts
PM
Project Manager
PO
Project Owner
PR
Public Relation
PRM
Persons with reduced mobility
RASCOP
Rail Standardisation Coordination Platform
RBs
Recognition Bodies
RDD
Reference Document Database
EC Regulation
RFC
Rail Freight Corridors
RlINF
Registerof Infrastructures
RISC
Railway Interoperability and Safety Committee
RSD
Railway Safety Directive
RSG
Research Steering Group
RU
Railway Undertaking
SAIT
Safety Alert ITTool
SAP
Strengthening Action Plan 2023-2027
SCS
Safety Culture Survey
SERA
Single European Railway Area
SLA
Service Level Agreement
SM
Service Manager
SMS
Safety Management System
SNE
Seconded National Expert
SO
Service Owner
SOS
Strengthening ERAs role in Operational Safety in the EU, Concept
paper submitted to the MB
SP
Safety Performance
SPD
Single Programming Document
SRD
Single Rules Database
SSC
Single Safety Certificate
TA
Temporary Agent
TA
Trackside Approvals
TAF
Telematics Applications for Freight
TAP
Telematics Applications for Passenger Services
TDG
Transport of Dangerous Goods
TSI
Technical Specifcations for Interoperability
UIC
International Union of Railways
VA
Vehicle Authorisation
VKI
Vehicle Keeper Marking
WP
Work Programme
4RP
Fourth Railway Package
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Reg:

Foreword bythe
Executive Director
2024 marks the zoth anniversary of the creation of the European Union Agency for
Railways. Since its foundation, ERA has been at the side of the European railway stake-
holders, carrying out an ever-increasing set Of crucial tasks for railways:
am proud ofall
the achievements the Agency has accomplished during the last 20 years and
am Con-
fident the Agency will bring even more added value to the railway sector in the future;
especially with the progressive development ofthe Single European Railways Area.
In the recent years; we have witnessed many worrying trends, such as the resurgence of
war onthe European continent certain macroeconomic challenges; as well as increasing-
Iy serious climate change impacts across the world.In such worrying environment trans-
port has a crucial role to play, not onlyin ensuring the safe transport of people and goods;
butas well in the decarbonisation ofthe sector and its adaptability to a changing climate:
Safety is also a crucial element for railways. Following the tragic rail accident Which took
place in February 2023 near Larissa in Greece; we need to ensure that the right measures
and checks are put in place to prevent such accidents from happening again. "A sustain-
able; safe European transport system without frontiers" does therefore not only represent
Josef Doppelbauer
our Agency's vision statement but also reflects the ambition ofthe rail sector at large。
In line with its mandate; the European Union Agency for Railways aims at covering a Wide
range of areas of work involving actions to drive the continuation of the progress With
railway Safety and interoperability, together with its role Of EU-wide authority for Vehicle
Authorisation, Single Safety Certification, and ERTMS Trackside Approval。
The
multi-annual work programme 2024-2026, together with the annual programme
2024 have been planned and prepared following the principles ofthe intervention log-
ic. In addition, the Work programme was prepared reflecting the conclusions of the SPD
2024 Workshop held with the Management Board in June 2022.
The year 2024 Will be an important milestone for our Authority activities, as also it marks
the ffth year since the start ofthe Agency's Authority activities according to the technical
ofthe 4th Railway Package The Agency has now gained signifcant experience in
running the tasks related to its Authority role, as wellas in forecasting their volume to the
best extent possible; considering the challenges of
moving macroeconomic context.
However; the volatility of the applications and their volumes can still greatly differ from
one year to the other; Which renders the planning of activities and the detailed forecast
Of revenues somewhat complex. The Agency will continue to monitor this aspect closely
and to apply its agile management of these tasks:. In addition, it is important to note that
the Agency has reached an increasingly higher maturity level with the processing ofau-
thorisation and certification tasks; which provides for a higher efficiency in their delivery:
The Agency Willalso continue to reinforce its efficiency and effectiveness for this multian-
nual work programme. In 2022 already, the Agency's Management Board adopted the
Strengthening Plan and its subsequent action plan prepared by the Agency in close
cooperation With the European Commission; highlighting the critical importance of ar-
eas Of works such as: TSIs and national rules clean Up, ERTMS, CSM ASLR the monitoring
Of NSAs and NoBos, as Wellas data and digitalization. As
a result; the Agency received
an increase Of 12 temporary agent posts (TAs) starting in 2023, which should be entirely
covered through the Agency's existing stream of revenues. The latter represents a signif-
icant challenge, especially in the context of a volatile pattern Of inflation . Continuously
the Agency is making a thorough assessment Of its capacity to cover these costs in
FOREWORD BYTHE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
pillar

sustainable manner until the end of MFF 2021-2027. Additionally, the Agency is making
sustained efforts for a combined response to the resourcing
challenge by increasing the
direct utilisation ofits resources, both in terms of budget and FTEs。
The Agency keeps a strong commitment to deploying the necessary resources to meet
the legal deadlines related to issuing OfVA, SSC and ERTMS Trackside approvals; While also
respecting the deadlines for its safety and interoperability related activities; allof which
contribute to the achievement ofthe high-level policy objectives ofthe 4th Railway Pack-
age. The decision time linked to the authority tasks has undeniably a tremendous impact
on the rail stakeholders and on the competitiveness of rail compared with other sectors。
The Agency therefore strives for an increasingly higher level of efficiency in its authority
tasks, as forits otheractivities。
The Agency has based the 2024 budget envelope on the draft budget proposal ofthe Eu-
ropean Commission and is hopeful that this envelope will be confrmed as the fnal result
ofthe EU budget negotiation procedure for 2024.Any cut applied to this envelope would
affect the level ofambition and commitment for the proposed activities in 2024.
The Agency would also like to bring forward interesting and new projects that could
beneft the entire rail sector. Separately to the Single Programming Document the Agen-
Cy has put forward
proposal on its resource needs to develop the Information Sharing
System (ISS), Which is crucial for the successful implementation Of CSM ASLR The Agency
Will continue to work intensely on its NSA monitoring activities, as it is one of the policy
priorities highlighted in the Strengthening Action Plan. In addition, there is a need to de-
velop, together with Member States, a new Priority Countries Programme (PCP)at EU level
with a broader approach Which goes beyond the scope of current monitoring activities
ofthe Agency
NSA, NoBo, Peer review NIB, etc). The PCP has the potential to provide
more holistic picture Of railway safety and interoperability in the Member States; and
tO
bring further changes to improve safety across the EU through capacity building and
mutual exchanges. These tasks would need to receive an additional dedicated resource
envelope. The legal framework (current and any potential new evolution) is to be defned.
Would like to assure the members of the Management Board that the Agency will con-
tinue to implement the mechanism already put in place for aregular monitoring ofthe
SPDimplementation in terms of outputs delivery and resource consumption, as wellas
ofthe Strengthening Action Plan. The Agency Will also continue to improve the set of
budget execution monitoring actions already established to make best use ofthe avail-
able budget appropriations: The Agency will strengthen its tools to better plan, monitor;
and report so as to continuously increase its data-driven, transparent working culture. In
addition, more efforts will be produced to achieve more with less resources, as Wellas en-
suring thatthe processes within the Agency are streamlined to deliver high-quality results
toallour stakeholders; in line with the Strengthening Action Plan 2023-2027.
The Agency will also continue to work closely with its stakeholders in orderto ensure the
successful implementation ofthis challenging multi-annual programme. These activities
ofthe Agency are crucial for contributing to the achievement of a significant modal shift
to rail, in particular by helping to create and manage a Single European Rail Area,and to
continuously improve railway safety in Europe: At the same time;
We will continue
OUI
efforts to progress towards a culture of collaboration in the Agency.
woUld like to thank
the ERA staff and allour stakeholders
their dedication and support that
am SUre Will
continue for the years to come; as we will work towards an improved European transport
system, multimodal in nature; with rail as its backbone; eventually benefitting from a fully
functioning Single European Railway Area。
Josef Doppelbauer
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
(e9.
foI

Mission statement
The vision and mission statements ofthe Agency ("A sustainable; safe European transport
system Without frontiers" and "Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe railway SyS-
tem Without frontiers" respectively) were defned in 2021 . They reflect its current position
and role; While of course remaining
in line with the legal mandate ofthe Agency:
The Agency contributes to the further development and effective functioning of a Single
European Railway Area without frontiers, by guaranteeing a high levelofrailway safety
and interoperability, While improving the competitive position ofthe railway sector, as
envisaged bythe Agency Regulation 2016/796.In particular; the Agency shall contribute;
on technical matters; to the implementation of Union legislation by developing a com-
mon
approach to safety on the Union rail system and by enhancing the level of interoper-
ability on the Union rail system and associated data, with a specifc focus on facilitating the
interoperable deployment of ERTMS and on access to data for pushing rail modernisation
and digitalisation. By working in close cooperation with the national authorities acting in
the felds of railway Safety and interoperability, the Agency will substantially contribute
to an increased competitiveness ofrail and to the seamless cross-border traffic in the EU.
Moreover; through timely delivery of appropriate regulation that reflects the harmonised
and validated solution proposals from the Europes Rail Joint Undertaking; the Agency
contributes signifcantly to the coordinated and
deployment ofsuch solutions; thus
strengthening the competitiveness of rail in the transport mix。
AIIthese elements are
translated into rail becoming more attractive and affordable for passengers and freight
With the Agency playing an active role in supporting the delivery of the European Green
Deal forthe EU citizens and businesses。
Vision statement
Mission statement
A sustainable; safe European transport system
Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe
without frontiers
railway system Without frontiers
To foster its mission; the Agency has identifed the following fundamentals (F) and ena-
blers (E):
MISSION STATEMENT
fully
rapid

Mission statement
ERA Fundamentals: Attributes
Sociallyand
Understand
F1.3
environmentally
F2.3
transport system
F3.3
Fairness and respect
F4.3
Transparency
responsible organization
complexity
AILour decisions are determined to
We acknowledge and take into
Our decisions are made with
We defne our priorities and monitor
serve the common good and the
account the legacy ofthe EU rail
impartiality, integrity and objectivity。
them in atransparent manner。
public interest:
system the complexity ofthe
Our loyalty to the organisation and
We evaluate the effects ofall OUr
interactions between the Various
each otheris essential to achieve OUr
actions on staffand stakeholders。
modes oftransport and levels of
mission. We resolve conflicts based
This serves
as input to drive future
decision.
on mutual respect。
improvement。
Looking for excellence
F1.2
Data Driven Organisation
F2.2
Learn from experience
F3.2
F4.2
Sustainable activities
in its diversity
Our collaborative analysis supports
We are looking for learning
We value the diversity Ofour
In the allocation of resources, we
decisions based on objective data。
opportunities internally and with
team and encourage a supportive
primarily consider ERAs priorities
external partners. We learn from errors
cooperation amongall
without
While caring for the wellbeing
ratherthan to blame. We see feedback
distinction striving for excellence
Off staffand the impact onthe
aS a Way to
improve our performance:
stakeholders。
F1.1
Mission driven organization
F2.1
Customer's needs
F3.1
Trust and pride
F4.1
Performance
We areall aware Of ERA's mission
We continuously analyse Who are
ERAis a
place to Work with a
We adopt an innovative spirit con-
and we are committed to support
OUr direct and indirect stakehold-
strong sense of
belonging; pride and
sidering rules as a tooland notan
together the achievement ofour
ers and their needs. We adoptan
fulflment
objective. We reward performance
business objectives。
exploratory and impartial attitude to
atall levels_
propose measures for their prob-
lems, needs and opportunities
Build a sustainable
Understand the transport
Work all together
Monitor our contribution
and safe European
and
mobility reality
as ateam
to the railway system
transport system
F1
F2
F3
F4
10
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Staff
good

Organisational cultural enablers: Attributes
E1
E2
E3
E4
INTERACTING
FORMALISING
DISSEMINATING
REINFORCING
Teamwork
Roles
E1.1
[2.1
[3.1
Communication
E4.1
Leading by example
and collaboration
and responsibilities
Collaboration Within and across
Roles, responsibilities and authorities
Information is openly shared within
Managers exhibit behaviours that
organisations is nurtured。
are understood and accepted.
and across organisations。
set the standard.
E1.2
Interpersonal values
[2.2
Organisational design
E3.2
Competence management
E4.2
Management intervention
Trust; respect and openness perme-
Organisational structures support
Competence management ensures
Managers ensure that incentives,
ate the
organisation and character-
the achievement of missionand
knowledgeable Workforce:
sanctions and recognition reinforce
ise inter-organisational relationships
organisational excellence:
behaviours and outcomes that
atall levels。
support the achievement of mission
and organisational excellence:
E1.3
Regulatory relationships
[2.3
Organisational systems
[3.3
Soft skills
E43
HOF expertise
Healthy regulatory relationships exist
Processes, tools and documentation
Leadership and non-technical skills
Human and organisational factors,
and ensure that the accountability
support the achievement of mission
are systematically developed.
including frontline experience; are
remains with the
Agency
and
organisationalexcellence:
systematically considered during
design and change:
MISSION STATEMENT
11

Through its mission and actions, the Agency is committed to contribute to the EC Political
guidelines:
European Green Deal
an economy that works for people
Europe ft forthe digital age
stronger Europein the world
The Agency will support the EC agenda to ensure sustainable; Safe, affordable; and acces-
sible transport and to strengthen railways' role in the transport mix, in line with its mission
and mandate。
12
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

General context

General context
Transportis an essential partofthe European integration, especially given its contribution
to the
functioning of the
movement of services; goods, and people. Transport also
represents around 9% ofthe EU gross added value and directly employs around 1
million
workers ( ), therefore representing an important sector for society at large. EU transport
policies have been developed according to the key principles of safety sustainability, resil
ience; connectivity; and efficiency。
Through its long-term vision for the transport sector and European society, the European
Commission published in 2020 the Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy with a detailed
action plan of 82 initiatives. With this strategy, the Commission presents how the EU trans-
port system Will achieve its needed green and digital transformation and become more
resilient_
As outlined in the European Green Deal the result will be a 909 cut in carbon
emissions by 2050. Regarding the rail sector; the following targets have been set:
Traffic on high-speed rail will double by 2030
Rail freight traffic Will increase by 509 by 2030 and double by 2050
By 2030, rail and waterborne-based intermodal transport will be able to compete
on equal footing With road-only transport in the EU
The European Union Agency for Railways will support the European Commission, in line
with its accountability ceiling, in achieving these goals; in particular through the further
development and effective functioning of a Single European Railway Area Without fron-
tiers。
The 2024-2026 programming period for the Agency involves two different types of activ-
ities:
The policy tasks contributing to the implementation of Union legislation by de-
veloping
a common
approach to safety on the Union rail system and by enhanc-
ing the level of interoperability on the Union rail system, taking into account the
policy priorities identifed in the Strengthening Plan and implemented through
the Strengthening Action Plan 2023-2027.
The
fully fledged performance of the Agency's tasks as EU-wide authority for
Safety certifcation, vehicle authorisation and ERTMS trackside approval, along with
othertasks in the field of railway safety and interoperability as foreseen in the Tech-
nical Pillar ofthe Fourth Railway Package:
The Agency continues to implement its work programme following the principles ofthe
intervention logic, in line with the guidelines provided by the Network Of EU Agencies:
The intervention logic supports the Agency by emphasising the desired changes and the
road to its achievement. It is also a thinking process supporting the Agency to design
reconsider;and adapt its outputs to the most effective one for a determined outcome:
The Agency also strives to increase its efficiency in delivering the outcomes and impacts
expected by EU citizens. In light ofthe above; the work programme ofthe Agency (in its
multi-annualand annual planning) is organised around seven strategic statements; Which
project the Agencys role in relation to its stakeholders; complemented by two transver-
sal strategic statements; Which capture the Agency's governance and support functions
These strategic statements have been in place since the adoption Of SPD 2022-2024 and
are extremely important; as they show the direction oftravelon which the Agency plans to
embarkin order to make railways work better for society, subject of course to its remitand
accountability ceiling. The concrete Agency work represented by projects and services
With concrete outpUts, is
organised by grouping the projects and services Which together
can contribute to the outcomes and impacts stated in a particular strategic statement。
In addition, SPD 2024-2026 will follow and align itself with the actions and resource allo-
cations detailed in the Strengthening Action Plan adopted by the MB in November 2022.
The seven priority areas Will be highlighted in the annual section and their importance
https:/leuropean-unioneuropa.eu/priorities-and-actions/actions-topic /transport
eh
14
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
free

Will be reflected both in terms Of FTE and budget allocation. Of course; the Agency will
remain flexible and redeploy resources if needed but this innovative approach provides
roadmap for all stakeholders regarding the areas on Which the Agency will focus in the
coming years:
Thanks to a joint effort With the European Commission and the support from the
agement Board, the Agency was granted 12 additional TAs to its establishment plan to
implement the Strengthening Plan . However, these additional resources must be fnanced
within the existing budget envelope; with no additional subsidy allocation, Which creates
budgetary pressure on the Agency: The Agency proposes in SPD 2024-2026 a robust
budget allocation, which copes with this pressure and provides resources for different
essential activities. However the budget is based on the assumption that the EC draft
budget proposal will be confrmed at the end ofthe EU budget negotiation cycle:
CUt
applied to this envelope would jeopardize the basic business continuity for the Agency's
functions and Will affect the level ofambition and commitment forthe proposed activities
in 2024.
The Agency Will pay signifcant attention to a regular monitoring ofthe SPD implemen-
tation in terms of outputs, resource consumption and revenues, Which can allow for agile
responses and possible adaptation of its work programme. The Agency will continue to
WOrK
together with the poolof experts forthe mutual beneft ofthe cooperation between
the Agency and the NSAs. This cooperation may also help the Agency to tackle capacity
shortages, as Wellas language skills gaps. In addition, the Agency Will strive for contin-
uously improving its efficiency in delivering the expected outputs, as well as its overall
performance in contributing to the expected outcomes and impacts。
GENERAL CONTEXT
15
Man-
Any C

Multi-annual programming
2024-2026

Multi-annual work programme 2024-2026
Structure ofthe multi-annual programme 2024-2026
The structure ofthe Agency's multi-annual work programme is organised according to
strategic statements:
Strategic Statement
There will no longer be any technical and operational
barriers to the
movement of people and goods by rail, assets can be reused
throughout Europe:
Strategic Statement 2
Rail will become the backbone that supports an envi-
ronmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will be favoured as
transport mode by the new generations。
Strategic Statement 3
Rail traffc will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as
Service)and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will be ensured, including multi-leg tick-
eting:
Strategic Statement 4
Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure mode of
transport for its users and workers
Strategic Statement 5 - Rail will be resilient and agile in responding to emergen-
situations。
Strategic Statement 6 -
Rail will become increasingly economically competitive
asa mode and as a sector
Strategic Statement 7
The EU will become the global reference for railand ERA
authorisations will be globally recognised:
Strategic Statement 8
The Agency Will ensure an effective and efficient gov-
ernance Of its portfolio of activities in order to offer the best value for money to
citizens and business in the EU
Strategic Statement 9
The Agency Willensure
performant working environ-
ment; based on high quality motivated resources and a collaborative behaviour。
Following guidance from the EU Agencies' network on the SPD, the Agency proposed for
SPD 2023-2025 to use the intervention logic on these strategic statements to identify im-
pact and outcomes. With SPD 2024-2026, the Agency proposes to look at a new concept:
intermediate outcome. Given that outcomes are quite difficult to influence directly from
outputs, the concept of intermediate outcomes is
interesting given its more direct link
With the Agency and its influence on outcomes。
Accountability ceiling

岂
Impacts
Outcomes
Indercediete
Outputs
Activities
Inputs
鹭
limited
iniueece
Some influence
Total control
influence
The Agency has therefore started to develop intermediate outcomes in each strategic
statement. For intermediate outcomes;
a set Of common interventions was defned by
the Agency:
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
17
free
Very

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
Building knowledge
Monitoring and analysing
ERA
sector builds non-existing knowledge
ERA monitors the sectorand its progress
Regulating
Reinforcing
EU laws and regulations are putin
to
亚
Possibilities to enforce
reinforce measures
achieve the desired outcome
to improve the current status in the railway
Sector
Knowledge sharing
ERA shares knowledge with the sector (i.e:
training; reports, etc)
These types ofinterventions will help structure the multiannual work programme and as-
sess Where additional workis most needed to achieve the desired outcomes  The multian-
nual section willalso reflect the results ofthe MB workshop on SPD 2024-2026 Which took
place in June 2022.
Inaddition, it should be noted that the arbitration exercise forthe year 2024 was further devel-
oped and intensifed. Indeed,it followed the
principles and areas of priorities detailed in
the Strengthening Action Plan. In addition, the Agency prioritised through the identification
ofthe anticipated added value of activities, as wellas their potential contribution towards the
desired outcomes:. The Agency followed a data-driven approach, looking at previous years
resource consumption,as wellas the deliverables description for each project
service。
Contentofthe multi-annual programme 2024-2026
Forits 2024-2026 work programme; the Agency considers the possible ways of balancing
the demand forits authority workon one hand and the ambition level for the priority areas
detailed in the Strengthening Plan, on the other hand. The authorisations, certifcates and
approvals issued by the Agency have a direct impact on the functioning of the rail sector
and
much added value in terms of safety and interoperability。
Furthermore; subject to additional resources; the Agency intends to implement together
with Member States, a Priority Country Programme (PCP) Which is a strategic initiative that
aims to assess and monitor the state Of railway safety and interoperability legislation im-
plementation in Member States providing a comprehensive picture of railway Safety and
helping the MS to identify areas for improvement
The focus ofthis programme will be on the legal set-up and the capability ofthe organisations
within the Member States to take Up the Various responsibilities under railway Safety and in-
teroperability legislation, both at authority as wellas operational level Furthermore; also the
Member State responsibility under EU legislation will be in the scope ofthe assessments。
In this perspective; the Agency has additionally developed a robust business case for the
developmentofa supporting Information Sharing System (ISS) demonstrating the expected
benefits; clarifying the additional resources needed to develop, deploy and maintain the ISS
asan ITsolution and providing a detailed timetable for implementation spanning from 2024
to 2029.The objective of the ISS initiative is to improve railway Safety in the European
Union through the sharing and analysis of relevant safety information, supported
bya pro-active; performing and technology-proof system of data exchange。
In addition, the strategic role in policy development; research and innovation; and ad-
Vice provided by the Agency is recognised as highly important and should continue to
be strengthened. The cooperation with the Europes Rail Joint Undertaking is a strategic
long-term activity aimed at ensuring alignment between the EU regulatory framework on
railways and efficient EU funding of rail research Furthermore, this will continue paving
the way for the inclusion ofnew technologies in the TSIs and pending their adoption,in
technical opinions of the Agency: It is equally important to highlight the possible role of
the Agency to monitor and support the adequate implementation of the existing legal
18
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
place
key
bring

framework through a harmonised levelof maturity both at the levels of operators and na
tional authorities: To make its operations always more effcient and effective; the Agency
Will continue to implement to its full extent the continuous improvement approach to
its project management and make sure that its resources are deployed in those activities
Where it can have the highest impact and added value for the railway sector and the EU
citizens: The Agency will also continue to develop its workstream on cybersecurity and
Will liaise with ENISA to explore future scope for cooperation . Following the cybersecurity
regulation, the Agency will need to increase its resources spent on this item, Which is re-
flected in the Annual Work Programme:
The breakdown Of FTE and budget distribution by Strategic Statement overthe 2023-2026
period are shown in the following charts。
Figure 1: FTE distribution
2027
2026
2025
2024
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Ststl
Stst2&3
Stst4
Stst5
Stst6
Stst7
Stst8
Ststg
Figure 2: Budget distribution by Strategic Statement (E)
2027
2026
2025
2024
000 000
2000 000
3000 000
000000
5000 000
Ststl
Stst2&3
Stst4
Ststs
Stst6
Stst7
Stst8
Ststg
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
19

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
The following table lists the main Key Performance Indicators for 2024:
Strategic
Key Performance Indicator
Target
Statement 
3396ofintroduced CRs
Inclusion in TSIs ofrequirements
NRs
Closed
Dissemination on TSIs
workshops organised _
Publication of CCS TSI
CCSTSI
maintenance and operational activities
Application guide
No.of NoBo audits performed peryear
15
Within 10 working days;, as
Registers related service requests by customers
determined in the service
processed (reply provided to customer)
level agreement
Issuing SSC _
VA/ ERTMS TA
Proportion of
decisions taken according to the legal framework
1009
deadlines
ERA Technical Opinion(s) addressing future
development of RINF Regulation and associated
2&3
T1 2024
references to the ERA Vocabulary further ensuring
IMs'implementation ofnew parameters
No.of NSA audit performed
Implementation OfGOA
Management ofthe Group of Analysts
workplan during CSM
ASLP phase
Delivery ofthe activities as planned in the
Communication & Dissemination Planand at
Delivered as planned
least annually report on those activities to MB
% Ofthe annual appropriations committed
989
% Execution of carry over payment
>959
appropriations
% Payments made by contractual deadline
959
Increase ofachievement
Output achievement rate
rate to the previous year
Implemented following
Implementation ofthe Strengthening Action Plan
the SAP deadlines
Odd years: SES organised
action plan developed
and approved/ Even years:
Staff engagement survey
closing ofat least 709 of
the follow-Up actions from
the action plan
% Implementation ofthe establishment plan
>989
% Implementation ofthe external personnel
>989
plan
Staff turnover
Less than 59
%
Availability ofthe core ICT systems
959
Service Desk users' satisfaction feedback "Good/
>709
Excellent" rate
CA + SNE combined
20
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
from

In the feld of Railway Interoperability, the Agency has identifed so far six intermediate
outcomes that it can actively influence through its portfolio OfTSIs, ERTMS, National rules;
Strategic Statement 1
and Registers services. They are essential components; Which will lead to the achievement
ofthe strategic statement. The already identifed intermediate outcomes are as follows:
There will no longer be
technical and operational barriers
1.ERTMS is fully implemented on rolling stock by all Railway Undertakings
tothe free movement of people
2.ERTMS is fully implemented on railway infrastructure by all Infrastructure Managers
and goods by rail, assets can be
reused throughout Europe:
3.AIIrailway rolling stock is TSI compliant by all RUs across the EU. (exc. TAP/TAF & OPE)
4.All
railway infrastructure is TSI compliant byall IMs across the EU
5. National rules (rolling stock & fixed installation) are harmonised across the EU
6.AII relevant railway-related data is shared in an open and transparent Way so that it
is utilisable and useful for the sector
Of course; this list will continue to evolve in the future to include additional intermediate
outcomes, as the Agency continues to pursue its full implementation ofthe intervention
logic.
Following the results ofthe MB workshop in June 2022 on SPD 2024-2026, Where the Man-
agement Board expressed its desire for the Agency to propose more knowledge sharing
activities, such as training, and other dissemination activities; the Agency will strengthen
its activities in this domain. Such activities will be coordinated by the ERA Academy, being
the established knowledge sharing vehicle of the Agency: While being part Of Strategic
Statement 7, the ERA Academy activities, by their nature; serve all strategic statements of
the Agency。
The Agency Will also continue to deliver on its role as sole body responsible for issuing
multi-Member-State authorisations, certifcations, and approvals. The Agency will contin-
Ue
performing its tasks in full partnership with the NSAs. In addition, the links between
authorisation, certifcations, and approvals by the Agency and the supervision by the NSAs
will be
strengthened. The Agency
also continue to drive further the harmonisation
towards the Single European Railway Area, ensuring the path towards technical and oper-
ational interoperability: The advancement of the System Pillar and the Agencys inputs in
the matter
further support harmonisation。
The lessons learnt through the issuing Of VAs, ERTMS trackside approvals and from the
monitoring Of NoBos will be used to capture continuous improvement opportunities for
the technical specifcations and to the authorization procedures. The experience in issuing
safety certifcates Will be used to better steer the safety related policy making, So railway
safety will never be misused again as a barrier More specifcally; the work on NoBo moni-
toring will be reinforced in 2024, With additional resources dedicated to this activity, in line
With the direction given in the Strengthening Plan.
The stability of the TSIs, together with a successful cleaning up ofthe remaining national
rules are the foundation of seamless operations across Europe and for an increas-
ingly effective authority function , reinforcing the added value ofa European mindset in
the EU railway system. In 2024, the Agency Will continue to work on the cleaning-up of
national technical and safety rules, as Wellas those on fixed installation and ERTMS. This
cleaning-upisan important step towards delivering atruly harmonised EU rail system The
Agency will continue to focus on the removal of redundant national rules (operational
and technical), the harmonisation ofthe remaining rules and the development of AMOCs。
In 2023, the Agency has fnalised the cleaning up ofthe national rules for vehicles. The
Agency has further identified the national rules that should be transferred into the TSIs by
means Of further harmonisation, specific cases and closing of open points: This transfer
Will take place as Of 2024 by means of Change Requests and Will result in a signifcant
reduction of the national rules。
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
21
any
Will
will

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
Close 33% of the change requests following the national technical rules which led
to theirinclusion in TSIs;
Continue to assess NSR set-up in Member States_
When it comes to dissemination, the Agency agreed on a communication plan forthe TSIs
implementation. This plan consists ofa Q&A set of information, available on the ERA Web-
site, the follow-up ofthe webinars already performed in 2023 and workshops. The Agency
plans to organise 4 workshops in 2024.
As part ofthe next TSI revision, the Agency will work for reducing further the existing spe-
cific cases Of Member States on top of the harmonised technical specification contained
in TSI.Even ifthe transfer of the cleaned national rule into the TSIs will lead to potential
increase ofnew specific cases, the Agency's priority remains to work on EU harmonisation
ofchecks and tests. By end 2024, the Agency Will deliver an impact assessment on the TSI
specific cases and theirtemporary duration.
As part of the maintenance of the National Rules; the Agency will support the Member
States in the review of their National Rules against the new requirements of the TSI Pack
age 2023.In 2024the Agency will introduce a CCM process that
control the additionof
new National
Specifc Parameters (NSPs).In parallel we Will seek to establish the complete
list Of current NSPs, use best efforts to start the clean-upNalidation Of current NSPs and
propose a timeline for cleaning the list that matches the resourcing and priorities ofthe
Agency work progamme:
Ofcourse; seamless operations also mean exchanging data,
a process on which the
Agen-
Cy Will continue to contribute by facilitating the data exchange for, among Various pur-
poses, authorization, registration,and route compatibility checks;, based on the linked data
approach The Agency acknowledges the clear shared ambition to drive the development
ofthe digital agenda and in 2024 will implement in full the requirements set out in the
recent RINF
regulation amendments, including the application guide that will support the
implementation on the ground. In parallel the Agency is working on the proof of concept
for
digital route book and in particular identifying the supporting infrastructure data
needed for route books. The ISS tool to support the implementation ofthe CSMASLP reg-
ulation will be built on the extension ofthe ERA
Ontology: Whilst the funding to develop
the
application layer has not yet been secured the Agency is preparing the development
ofthe Ontology for agreement in early 2024. The announced evolution of the Telematics
TSIs is recognised as is the fnancial support of the Commission for this Work. The work
however is contingent on successful procurement in 2024 and in the absence ofthe re-
quired internal resources must be considered at risk, at least until the successful outcome
ofthe procurement has been secured。
The Agency will also assess mature innovation products; with
a Clear
potential for market
uptake. In this context; the Agency will focus on exploring emerging needs such as:
Better coordination of traffic management EU-wide, including, but not limited to,
planning, capacity management; and emergency responses
Increased and improved offer for passengers and freight in the railway sector
Improved operations through the adoption of automatic translation systems and
training for operators in their native language. This would enhance the railway SyS-
tems resilience to interoperability issues and increase cross-border traffic。
The objective is to make the railway system more resilient to interoperability issues and
increase the cross-border traffic。
When it comes to ERTMS , after the publication of the CCS TSI 2023/1695 including the
new set Of ERTMS specifcations (being ETCS Baseline 4 Release 1, RMR GSM-R Baseline
Maintenance Release
FRMCS Baseline 0; ATO Baseline
Release 1, the focUs for
2024-2026 wil be on the implementation of the new CCS framework. In addition, a fur-
ther harmonisation through TSIs Will focus on telematics; security aspects, national rules
harmonisation and innovations such as new materials; new on-board sources of energy
22
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Will

based on the results provided through the System Pillar work.A CCS TSIamendment will
be required which mainly addresses the SUBSET-153 and the necessary testing specifca-
tions (SUBSET-076 for ETCS and SUBSET-151 for ATO).In addition, there will be a technical
opinion providing the delivery ofthe FRMCS V2 specifcations。
CCSTSIapplication guide
Will be drafted with the focus on the changes in the CCS TSI implementation framework
in particular the new transition and migration schemes included in the CCS TSI. In orderto
apply the specifications maintenance framework the Agency will deliver an ERTMS Base-
line Compatibility Analysis report which includes the answers ofthe ERA questionnaires。
The service 'Management of Innovation and long-term evolution ofthe Agency' will con-
tinue to steer the research & innovation policy ofthe Agency and its future development。
It will also bein
charge ofcoordinating the Agencys input to the work on the System Pillar。
The Agency willensure technical assistance to the Commission, as guardian of interoper-
ability and safety, and as system authority for ERTMS & telematics. This will boost harmo-
nisation of operations, subsystems, and components, leaving the practical aspects to the
industry, assuming an appropriate level of oversight. The Agency Will continue to identify
related research needs and assess mature innovation products, With
clear potential for
market uptake; in order to reflect them into the technical specifcations。
Outcomeindicators
Harm-onisation and reduction of Member-State specifc National rules (both national
safety rules and national technical rules) via a Single Rules Database
Number of international passengerlfreight trains at selected border stations
2
(interoperability reports)
Numberof hours spent at cross-border operations
ERTMS trackside deployment in the EU
5
Vehicles equipped with ERTMs in the EU
Numberof open type 3 issues When issuing VA and TA/ overall number of certifcates
issued
Number ofVA and TA issued with reduced validity period/ overall no. of certifcates
issued
Number of data consumption ofregisters
Resource envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTEs
80.08
81.87
81.08
Budget
E3,766092
E4,205,967
4,198,123
This number includes the POE and NSA costs for fees and charges activities on ERTMS TA and Vehicle authorisa-
tions
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
23

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
The Agency is playing
pivotal role in supporting the transformation ofthe European
Strategic Statement 2 &3
transport system towards decarbonised, interoperable; and safe transport modes based
on multi-modal integration (Maas).
2 Rail will become the backbone
that supports an environmentally
In 2023, the Agency played a key role for driving the data and digitalisation agenda for
sustainable multimodal transport
railways, based on the linked data pilots and the revision Of TAP/TAF TSI. Those elements
system and will be favoured as
are
particularly relevant in a multi-modal context as
enable that integration in terms
transport mode by the new
ofticketing and timetables which has been preventing the effective development ofrail
generation
as the backbone ofa multi-modaland international transport。
3 Rail traffc will become seamless
The Agency has identifed for this Strategic Statement two intermediate outcomes; which
and Maas (Mobility as a Service)
will support the achievement of the overarching statement There are the following ones:
and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will
1. TAPis implemented by allrelevant railway actors (IMs, RUs, ticket vendors), it is actu-
be ensured
including multi-leg
ally used as the main channel of information exchange and the ticketing is integrat-
ticketing
ed in the multimodal environment with other transport modes
2.TAFis implemented by all relevant railway actors (IMs, RUs, WKs, CTOs)and it is actu-
ally used as the main channel of information exchange
Of course; TAF and TAP TSIwill also be in scope for some intermediate outcomes already
identifed under strategic statement
Additional intermediate outcomes will be identi-
fied in the future to further implement the intervention logic within the Agency:
Forthe period 2024-2026, the Agency will still be a top player in ensuring the right frame-
work forthe data and information exchange related to assets and services (includ-
ing ticketing data), based on linked data, universal data identifers and
more and better
data exchanged between operators and customers. This will ensure a seamless exchange
ofdata with other modes oftransport; thus allowing the customers to beneft from a com-
prehensive logistics chain orthe mobility-as-a-service; respectively。
While specifications for infrastructure description related data used in the register ofin-
frastructure (RINF), respectively for information exchange in telematics applications, were
developed for different purposes; they now appear to be inconsistent between one an-
otherin the context oftheir integration into the European Mobility Data Space (EMDS) for
which the ERA Vocabulary has been setas building block for rail. Corresponding alignment
and
linking ofrail data for infrastructure description constitutes both an internal and ex-
ternal challenge for the Agency that Will be addressed through the work of the Agency
on the review of the governance of location coding in the context of the review OfTSIs
on telematics
applications and development of the RINF Regulation and associated RINF
application。
Moreover the Agency is a publisher in the apen data portal, with 13 datasets published:
Currently, the Agency is developing the strategic direction for linked data under strategic
statement 8, while exploring the mainstreaming of this approach to other registers and
databases. Once moved from
strategic development concept to
mainstreamed ap-
proach; this stream Of work Will be covered under strategic statement 2 and 3. In addition
the TAF TSI will provide the data communication requirements for the transparent and
efficient traffc management and train operations system of the future including also
first and last mile logistic segments involving intermodal actors (operators, terminals)and
(i) linkage to other modes oftransport (road, waterborne). This will also contain the en-
hanced simple and smart tracking oftrains;, wagons and consignments. The same TSI will
also include additional requirements forthe setting up of Laas starting from consignment
order (intermodal compliant), train operation preparation and ending in well-predicted
efficient delivery oftrains; wagons and consignments to the business partners。
Concerning the environmental sustainability ofthe railway system, the Agency will contin-
ue to deliver supportand assistance to the EC on railand sustainability with annual topical
reports, as Wellas for the coordination of transport of dangerous goods by rail,
recognising of course the supporting essence of the Agency's role in the matter。
24
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
they

Outcomeindicators
The level ofimplementation OfTAF and TAP TSLas monitored through the annual
"Safety and Interoperability Progress Report"
Evolution in share of rail (both passenger and freight) in the EUs transport market
compared to air; road or maritime transport
3
GHG emission from rail compared with othertransport modes (shares
Resource envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTEs
2.95
2.95
2.95
Budget
42,538
42,538
E42,538
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
25

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
In the feld of Railway Safety, the Agency has identifed 3 categories of intermediate out-
Strategic Statement 4
comes that it can actively influence through its portfolio of safety related projects and
services and that are essential pre-conditions to achieve the strategic statement 4. The
Rail will be an increasingly safe and
identifed intermediate outcomes are as follows:
secure mode oftransport forits
users and workers
1. All railway operators
IM RUECM
understand and accept their responsibilityand
actively implement an SMS to control the risks of operational activities;
2.An increased performance ofand trust in the different safety related control levels in
the system
ERA , MS, NSA, ASBO, ECM CB, accreditation, recognition, NIB;
3
Safety and safety management/performance related data is shared in an open and
transparent Way;
Up until now the Agency has invested most of its efforts in building knowledge and reg-
ulating, While not sufficiently supporting the railway sector in the actual implementation
Of the legislative framework The following years of the Agency's work programme Will
focus more on the actual implementation by supporting the sector through knowledge
sharing, by better understanding the issues the sector is facing when implementing the
legislative framework by reinforcing the expected outcome where possible and enforcing
it Where necessary. Within this framework of intermediate outcomes and interventions for
statement 4 the Agency will continue to focus on:
1 .
Supporting Member States in developing, adopting and repealing national legis-
latjonand
strengthening NSAs' and NIBs' capacity, in line with principles and legal
acts promoted by the EU. (sharing knowledge/ monitoring/ reinforcing)
2. Enhancing railway safety through positive safety culture and integration of
human and organisational factors and on the harmonisation of the safety
approach, partly through SSC applications. (sharing knowledge/ monitoring/
reinforcing)
3
Monitoring of NSAs and the follow-up of issues emerged during the
cycle of
audits (monitoring / reinforcing) By the end ofthe Znd cycle; reflection as to Wheth-
er
changes to the current framework are needed will be made and appropriate pro-
to the MB will be put forward in 2025.
Learning lessons through the issuing Of SSCs, the monitoring Of NSAs, the review
Of NIB accident investigation reports and the information exchanged during
NSA and NIB meetings and meetings organised with the AsBos, this Will be used to
continuously improve the common safety methods, as well as the safety certifica-
tion
procedures (knowledge building/ sharing knowledge _
monitoring)
5. Strengthening the culture Of risk management to identify risks and mitigating
measures but also opportunities to improve the efficiency Of operations preserving
the Safety level This shall cover well-known operational scenarios;
including interfaces
with other transport modes; and the adoption of emerging technology and related
relevant risks
cyber security, etc). (knowledge building/ sharing knowledge)
Improving the structure; quality, and availability Of safety relevant data While
making sure jt is shared in an open and transparent Way among all railway actors。
(knowledge building/ monitoring):
26
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
posals
(e9

Outcomeindicator
Number of open type 3 issues when issuing SSC's/ overall numberof certifcates issued
Number of SSC's issued with reduced validity period/ overall numberof certificates
2
issued
Number of appeals made by operators in a year linked to SSC certifcation/ average
number of SSC's issued peryear
Percentage of NSA's audited with at least
defciency (focused on defciencies still
open from the 1st Cycle). Note: this is a rolling indicator
NSA Monitoring: number of defciencies still open (follow-up ofthe 1st cycle)Vs
5
number of defciencies ofthe
1st
cycle (rolling indicator) Note: this is a rolling indicator
Number of peer reviewed NIB's
Number ofvolunteering NIBs to participate in the NIB peer review/ total numberof
NIB's (on ayearly basis)
Resource envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTEs
32.78
30.75
30.31
Budget
E1,258,487
E1,416,204
f1,268,927
This number includes the POE and NSA costs for fees and charges activities on SSC.
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
27

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
The Agency is currently reviewing the strategic statement 5, especially as no projects has
Strategic Statement 5
been identifed yet forthe next three years。
Rail will be resilient and agile
Outcomeindicators
in responding to emergency
Under development
Situations
Resource envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTES
Budget
Dm
28
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

The Agency will endeavour to make sure that the rules and system specifications are
smart; proportionate and contribute to the competitiveness of the industry: It will also
Strategic Statement6
make sure that the SSC, VA, and ERTMS TA processes are cost and time effcient, fostering
the entrance ofnew operators in the market.
Rail will become increasingly
economically competitive as a
As presented in previous strategic statements, the agency aims at evaluating the eco-
modeand as a sector
nomic impact of the vehicle authorisation and issuing of single safety certifcate
processes on the railway sector the impact ofthe TSIs as a package, of market open
ing and competition and of modular interchangeability in the ERTMS system spec-
ifcations:. The Agency will assess interoperability and safety improvements from
cost-effectiveness perspective, also considering effciency and effectiveness Of the
Agency's internal processes. The results ofthe assessments Will be used to propose rec-
ommendations for improving the legal texts; as Well as any non-regulatory instruments;
in the spirit of the Better Regulation principles. Building on the IA work in the past years;
particular attention will be given within the ESG on evaluating the IA practice and stake-
holder feedback on the IAs. In addition, the Management Board NSA and NRB networks
will be regularly informed about the return of experience; lessons learnt and priorities for
the IA practice: Furthermore; the important work on women in transport Which should
lead to the strengthening of womens employment and equal opportunities for women
and men in the transport sector will be pursued. Indeed, many studies have shown that
gender parity in the workforce increases the productivity and the cohesion ofstaff: In addi-
tion, gender parity increases diversity Ofviews; Which in itself brings innovative solutions。
Outcomeindicators
Evolution in rail traffc in absolute terms
2
Proportion of rail Vs road and air transport for passenger and freight railin the EU
3
Number of pax-km per passenger train-km
Number oftonne-km per freight train-km_
Average ERTMS costs (trackside and on-board)
Resource
envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTEs
3.28
3.28
3.28
Budget
80,400
80,400
E80,400
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
29

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
One ofthe objectives ofthe Agencyis to become a global reference in the railway domain
Strategic Statement 7
fortechnical matters and build its reputation ofa solid, resilient and trustworthy organiza-
tion. To achieve that; the Agency Will work on multiple fronts. It will support the ECin de-
The EU will become the global
signing; implementing, and monitoring the EU transport foreign policy: The Agency will
reference for railand ERA
also contribute to international standardization by strengthening its cooperation with
authorisations
be globally
European and international standardization organizations. The Agency Will also
recognised
prepare dissemination contents and
organise training sessions and other means ofshar-
ing the precious knowledge it has gathered. Furthermore; the Agency Will focus on the
EC priorities in terms oftechnical and geographical areas and willalso provide the
requested analyses and support。 When it comes to its international workstream, the
Agency Will focus its international activities on the basis of broader strategic considera-
tions and following general approaches:
Focussing
On
training and dissemination, in 2024-2026, the Agency Will continue
t0
strengthen its dissemination capabilities and tools; reflecting there the results ofthe MB
workshop on SPD 2024-2026. In addition, the Agency will propose
range of webinars
On
Variety Of topics under the expertise of the Agency and will continue to organise
EU-wide railway events:
Finally, the Agency Will continue supporting the NSA, NIB and NRB Networks and facilitat-
ing interfaces between them, the European Commission, and the Agency Where appro-
priate。
Outcomeindicator
Number of participants in ERA training sessions and other dissemination events
Resource envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTES
11.02
10.66
10.51
Budget
E1,419,298
1,195,713
1,388,100
30
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
will

In orderto achieve the strategic statement 8, the Agency has identifed six intermediate
outcomes that it Will actively work towards in the following years through the related
Strategic Statement 8
portfolio of projects and services:
The Agency will ensure an effective
1. Digitalisation ofthe Agency (as strategic preparation work)
and efficient governance ofits
Single source of data forinternalaccess
portfolio ofactivities in order to
Single source of data for external access
offer the best value for money to
Data is only introduced once
citizensand business in the EU
Data is FAIR (Findable, Accessible; Interoperable & Reusable)
2. Staff understand the mission and vision ofthe Agency; internalise it and have the
flexibility, the ownership/ autonomy with their activities, and
a clear mutual under
standing oftheir roles and responsibilities to actively contribute to the strategic di-
rection ofthe Agency
3.The Agency has
sound and agile governance framework Whose processes and
administration favour clarity, effciency and decision making at the right level
The SPD process steers the Agency' strategy and multi-annual work programme de-
Velopment in an integrated, evidence-based, and coordinated manner as Wellas
the monitoring of its effectiveness. This can be achieved through interfacing With
the internal stakeholders owning the strategies and the external stakeholders (EC;
EB strategic calendar etc).
5.SPD is the single reference (for internal and external stakeholders) for all critical tac-
tical information providing the overarching view on the implementation ofthe pro-
jects and services
6.The Agency is
learning, ethical, legally complying organisation where the deci-
sion-making; the strong fnancial control, the monitoring and reporting processes
give the EDthe assurance of best value for money。
As far as the digitalisation aspect is concerned the Agency has acknowledged its
importance to ensure
sustainable development of railways in Europe as a competitive
mode of transport and has the ambition to become
reference for facilitating the mul-
ti-modal data exchange and queries, based on the data-centric architecture and the
linked data technology. The Agency aims at exploiting the potential of digitalization ofthe
sector to the largest extent in its operations and administration. The |&T strategy and the
interoperable data roadmap Will boost the performance level of internal processes and
Willallow to have modern systems such as OSS, Registers; etc. fully functioning according
to schedule and completely interoperable with commercial software solutions currently
adopted by the railway industry to support the operators in their daily business。
The other intermediate outcomes will be achieved also through the optimization ofthe
ERA planning; monitoring and reporting capabilities; to enhance the Agency's pro-
gramme; project; and service management framework together with the Single Program-
ming Document and the Consolidated Annual Activity Report This Will lead to an allo-
cation Of resources based on impact and intended outcome; fostering the added value
created for the railway sector and an overall better performance ofthe Agency.An Action
Plan forthe Strengthening Plan 2023-2027 is put in place; in close link to the SPD imple-
mentation and monitoring. With the Agency s organisational culture change project 'Bet-
ter
together at ERA' the Agency
continue to invest resources and time to boost and
refne the work environment and cooperation between staff members。
Through its communication activities, the Agency Will design and implement actions to
increase ERA awareness ofthe railway system and the dynamics ofthe railway industry。
Moreover; the Agency Will develop campaigns to provide EU citizens with relevant infor-
mation and data demonstrating the added value brought by the Agency to society。
Outcome indicators
Budget discipline (% of deviation from annual budget)。
Data is FAIR measured on a scale
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
31
Will

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
Resource envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTEs
29.38
31.14
31.22
Budget
808,416
622,750
622,750
32
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Clause 4 ofthe ERA
Policy states that "People are our most valuable resource" Coherently,
the Agency will implement the new HR strategy 2023-2027, offering clear and transparent
Strategic Statement 9
career paths to staff members, allocate enough resources to make sure that good perfor-
mance and success stories are adequately rewarded,and that skills and competencies are
The Agency will ensure a
appropriate forthe Agency mission and kept up to date. Internal roles are not only defned
performant working environment
but also accompanied bya proper competency management system and communicated
based on high-quality motivated
externally so that interfaces are clear to the stakeholders. The Agency also acknowledges
human resources and a
the added value of diversity by implementing solutions to improve the gender balance in
collaborative behaviour
management and operational roles and to widen the number of nationalities employed.
Outcomeindicators
Staff satisfaction (evaluated through the Staff Engagement Survey or own survey with
the same Scope and questions)
Highly trained staff
6) (checked through dimensions training performance such as the
2
evolution of hours recorded on training in MS Project training budget number of PIT
requests)
3
HR strategy action plan progress
Overtime (% worked above the 40 hours/week on a monthly basis, over
1096)
Cloud migration
infrastructure migrated to the cloud
ICT strategy action plan progress
Resource envelope
2024
2025
2026
FTEs
26.69
26.94
26.94
Budget
E3,867,625
E3,867,625
E3,867,625
Resource permitting
checked through dimensions training performance such as
evolution Of hours recorded on training in MS
Project, training budget, number of PIT requests
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
33
the

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
Humanand fnancial resources
outlook fortheyears 2024
2026
Overview ofthe past and current situation
Staff population overview 2022-2024
Table 1
Human resources 2022-2024 (
2022
2023
2024
Authorised
Staff
Human resources
under the EU
populationat
Authorised
Requested
Budget
31/12/2022
Temporary Agents (TA)
154
150
166
166 (8)
Contract Agents (CA)
36
36
36
36
Seconded National Experts
4(10)
(SNE)
Total staff
194
188
206
206
External staff fnanced from
3
agreements
Structural service providers
14
Complete tables are provided in AnnexIV & AnnexV
Revenues 2022-2024
Table 2
Revenues 2022-2024
Financial resources
Revenues
2022
2023
2024
(EUR)
Budget (1) 
Authorised
Requested
1 . Fees and charges
7038812
10,856,649
11,913,156
2. EU contribution
26,278,423
27.418,274
28645,912
3. Third countries
Revenues
656,721
801,315
1,022,594
contribution (= EFTA)
+5.
+6+7.Other
10,000
general revenues
Total
33,983,956
39,079,238
41,581,662
Complete tables are provided in Annex Ill.
Expressed in terms of number of posts (headcounts/, except for
External staff financed from agreements" where
FTE is used to ensure compliance with Table 17- Additional external staff expected to be financed from grant;
contribution or service-level agreements in Annex IV.
Ofwhich 28 assigned to Fees and charges
Of which 8 assigned to Fees and charges
Of which 0 assigned to Fees and charges
2022 budget reflects the transfers and amendments as of November 2022 (comment valid for Annex Il & IlI)
34
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Expenditures 2022-2024
Table 3 -
Expenditure 2022-2024
Financial resources
Expenditure
2022
2023
2024
(EUR)
Budget (12) 
Authorised
Requested
Title 1
Staff
21,966,714
23,473,646
22,654,387
expenditure
Title 2 - Infrastructure
and operating
862,438
2,096,800
2,146,913
expenditure
Expenditure
Title 3
Operational
3,115,992
2,649,143
4,867.206
expenditure
Total EU contribution
26,945,144
28,219,589
29,668,506
(Titles
2+3)
Total Fees and charges
7,038,812
10,856,649
11,913,156
Total
33,983,956
39,079,238
41,581,662
Complete tables are provided in AnnexMl。
The Agency will need to constantly monitor the budget allocation for 2024 in line with its
ambition of deploying the envelope of 12 TAs envisaged in the SARThe 2024 budget can
be further impacted by the evolution of inflation and salary indexation. Several precau-
tions have been taken into account; including some cross-cutting decrease in operational
expenses for all activities, Which generate a very high pressure on the budget planning:
The Agency will continuously inform the ECand the MB on the budget implementation in
2024and on any potential pressures arising during the year。
Outlook for the years 2024
2026
Growth of existing tasks:
In 2024, following the endorsement ofthe Strengthening Plan and the allocation of 12ad-
ditional Tas to the Agencyto implement it, the Agency will dedicate these resources to the
following priority domains, in line with the Strengthening Action Plan (SAP) 2023-2027:
31
NSA monitoring
b.)
NoBo
Monitoring
ERTMS and radio communication evolution
d) TSIs
The cleaning ofnational rules (technical, operational and safety rules)
CSMASLP (13)
9.) Digitalisation ofthe Agency's registers
2022 budget reflects the transfers and amendments as of November 2022 (comment valid for Annex I1 & III)
(13}
Up until now, CSM ASLP has been resourced by decreasing the allocation of other Safety projects. The Strength-
ening Plan foresees an additional allocation of staff to CSM ASLP, a section of which will be used to allow the
aforementioned policy areas to recover their original staffing allocation。
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
35

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
Resource programming for the years 2024-
2026
Financialresources
Table 4 - Financialresources
Outlook 2024-2026
Financial resources
2024
2025
2026
(EUR)
Requested
Planned 
Planned
1. Fees and charges
11,913,156
12,145,805
12,347,496
2. EU contribution
28,645,912
29,218,830
29,803,207
3. Third countries
Revenues
1,022,594
1,043,046
1,063,907
contribution (= EFTA)
4.+5.
+6+7.Other
general revenues
Total
41,581,662
42,407,681
43,214,609
Title 1
Staff
22,654,387
23,135,596
23,705,022
expenditure
Title 2 -
Infrastructure
and operating
2,146,913
2,149,600
2,149,600
expenditure
Expenditure
Title 3
Operational
4,867,206
4,976,680
5,012,491
expenditure
Total EU contribution
29,668,506
30,261,876
30,867,114
(Titles
+2+3)
Total Fees and charges
11,913,156
12,145,805
12,347,496
Total
41,581,662
42,407,681
43,214,609
Complete tables are provided in Annex Ill.
Human resources
Table 5
Human resources
Outlook 2024-2026 (14)
2024
2025
2026
Human resources
Requested
ERA estimates
ERA estimates
Temporary Agents (TA)
166 (15)
66
66
Contract Agents (CA)
36 (16)
36
36
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
4(1)
Total staff
206
206
206
External staff fnanced from
3
Dm.
Dm.
agreements
Structural service providers
Complete tables are provided in AnnexIV & AnnexV
Expressed in terms of number of posts (headcounts/, except for
External staff financed from agreements" where
FTE is used to ensure compliance with Table 11- Additional EU
funding: grant, contribution and service-level agree-
mentsin Annex I。
Of which 28 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 8 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 0 assigned to Fees and charges
36
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Strategy for achieving effciency gains
The Agency is committed to continuously improving its functioning, streamlining its pro-
cesses; optimising the engagement of its staff and allowing for the reallocation of re-
sources to the most important priorities. In the course of 2021, the Agency worked quite
intensively on efficiency gains. This work progressed until the end of 2021 and led to the
drafting ofthe Strengthening Plan , fnalised, and endorsed by the Management Board at
the beginning of 2022. The purpose of the Strengthening Plan is to make the strongest
possible case in order to strengthen the Agency With resources matching the levelof
ambition necessary for achieving the important EC policy objectives for rail, in an effective
and efficient manner;and beneft from high levels of ambition and effciency within ERAs
structure and methods。
With the document serving as a basis for the internal EC budget negotiations in 2022, the
Agency received a proposed increase of 12 TAs in 2022. While the additional TA allocation
is lower compared tothe request from the Strengthening Plan (12 TAs proposed outofthe
22
requested), it can offer a good basis for the Agency to proceed with the implemen-
tation ofthe
Strengthening Plan。
Following the adoption of the aforementioned plan, the Agency prepared the Strength-
ening Action Plan (SAP) 2023-2027, which details the actions that will be carried out within
the next fve years to strengthen the Agency's efficiency. The SAP 2023-2027 is organised
along the following componentslobjectives:
a.1
Drive an optimal resourcing ofthe following policy priority areas, matched by pro-
portional outputs and outcomes, including effciency gains:
NSA and Nobo monitoring
ERTMS and radio communication evolution
TSIrelated work
Clean-up ofnational rules
CSMASLP
Digitalisation ofthe Agency's registers
b.)
Maintain proper resourcing and further effciency gains for the authority tasks;
Ensure a reduction in the Agency's administrative FTE allocation While maintaining
regularity and legality. This will be possible thanks no but not limited to:
Workload analysis
The Leaning of processes
training programme to facilitate the transition and provide the required
technical skills to staff
moving from administrative tasks to operational ones
d.)
Ensure the overall projected FTE evolution by 2027
Ensure effective and effcient budget management (planning and execution),ap-
propriate risk management
In order to ensure active involvement from all units across the agency and to monitor
the implementation of the SAP an internal task force has been set up in 2023. This task
force ensures optimal communication across the Agency on the SAP and its milestones;
as Wellas the implementation ofkey milestones. Finally, the Strengthening Action Plan has
been added to the Strategic Calendar ofthe Executive Board ofthe Agency.A rapporteur
has been appointed in 2023, Who will support guide; and monitor the implementation
throughout 2024-2026.
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2024-2026
37
TAS

Multi-annual programming 2024-2026
Negative priorities _
decrease of existing tasks
Paused activities for the year 2024
NSA Annual Performance review
Review OfNIB accident investigation reports
Stretched and targeted outputs for the year 2024
The Agency has been working on the Common Safety Methods on the assessment
Of Safety Level and Safety Performance for several years, following its mandate. It
alsois one ofthe priorities of the Strengthening Action Plan . However, an informa-
tion
sharing system is needed to prevent future accidents and improve safety as
Whole. The Agency does not have suffcient resources to create such tool. The
Agency has therefore developed a paper with the resources required to develop
andimplement such tool,along with atimeline and the stages ofimplementation.
The Information Sharing System (ISS) would require an estimated 2,375,000 EUR
budget and a total of 8 FTEs. Based on substantial efforts; given the already
stretched budget envelope; the Agency allocated 185,000 EUR from its budgetin
2024 to
out the preliminary work for ISS-Stage 1. This investment needs to
be complemented with the requested FTEs and budget (as perthe dedicated SOS
paper submitted to the MB), in order to ensure the project materialises its outputs
and impacts。
The Agency will continue to work intensely on its NSA monitoring activities, as itis
one ofthe policy priorities highlighted in the Strengthening Action Plan. However;
there is a need to develop
together with Member States a new Priority Countries
Programme (PCP) at EU level with
a broader
approach including more railway
stakeholders such as Member States; NSAINIB, RUs; IMs, AsBo, NoBo, Notifying
Authorities, National Accreditation Bodies and other checking bodies; and fnally
other operational stakeholders such as ECM,and wagon keepers:. The PCP has the
potential to provide a more holistic picture of railway Safety and interoperabilityin
the Member State; and to bring further changes to improve safety across the EU。
In orderto deliver this new initiative; the Agency would need an additional 50,000
EUR peryear, along with 3 FTEs:
38
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Very
carry

Annual Work
programme 2024

Annual Work programme 2024
Executive summary
The Annual Work Programme for 2024 details all the projects and services which will be
carried out to contribute to the Agency's goals in the year. The structure of the Work Pro-
gramme has been organised against desired long-term outcomes, implementing there-
fore an effective multi-annual work programme with developed objectives, as wellas the
intervention logic。
The annual work programme 2024had been aligned to the priorities listed in the Agency's
Strengthening Plan and the corresponding implementing document (SAP 2023-2027),
which represents an anchor for the planning in SPD 2024 and the subsequent ones。
The Agency's efforts in 2024 are particularly focused on:
Technical and operational barriers: The Agency Will work towards the reduc-
tion of technical and operations barriers Within the rail market through; among
others; the amendment of TSIs to be aligned with the technical innovations; har-
monisation of national rules among MSs, continuous NoBo monitoring, the deliv-
ery Of 4th Railway package activities (SSC, ERTMS TA, VA), and the deployment of
ERTMS.
Safety: The Agency will strengthen safety on rail through the development of
safety culture; the monitoring of National Safety Authority, the Common Safe-
Methods on Assessment Of Safety Level and Safety Performance (within the
boundaries linked to the resource constraints for the information sharing system),
and other relevant projects。
Data develapments and ticketing: The Agency will continue to foster develop-
ments in the feld of Linked data, as wellas development under the TAP TSI. The
Agency will continue its work on databases and registers optimisation。
Communication and dissemination: The Agency will increase communicating
and disseminating relevant information and knowledge to its stakeholders; as well
35
organising events and showcase the
interesting projects and developments
within the rail sector。
Good governance: The Agency will strive for governance excellence and eff-
ciency in allofits activities and will continue its efforts for improving budget exe-
cution rates and overall compliance and performance:
To best illustrate the alignment between SPD 2024 and SAP 2023-2027, the indicators and
targets Which contribute to the Strengthening Action Plan are indicated with a ticked box
in the annual tables hereinbelow. Moreover the numberof FTEs linked to SAP 2023-2027
is also highlighted in a separate column。
40
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Activities
Strategic statement 1
There will no longer be any technical and operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail;
assets can be reused throughout Europe。
Technical barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail are eliminated
Operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail are eliminated
Allrail assets can be re-used across the EU
The expected outcomes are further detailed to the following intermediate outcomes more directly linked to the Agency's Safety portfolio:
Expected outcome
ERTMS is
implemented on rolling stock by all Railway Undertakings
2. ERTMS is fully implemented on railway infrastructure by all Infrastructure Managers
3. AIl railway
stockis TSI compliant byall Rus across the EU.(exc. TAP/TAF & OPE)
AIlrailway infrastructure is TSI compliant byall Ims across the EU
5. National rules (rolling stock & fixed installation) are harmonised across the EU
6.AII relevant railway-related data is shared inan open and transparent Way So that it is utilisable and useful for the sector
Harmonisation and reduction of Member-State specifc National rules (both national safety rules and national technical rules) via SRD
Number of international passengerlfreight trains at selected border stations (interoperability reports)
Outcome indicators
Numberof hours spent at cross-border operations
ERTMS trackside deployment in the EU
Note: they will be further
Vehicles equipped with ERTMs in the EU
developed in future SPDs
Numberofopen type 3 issues when issuing VA and TAL overall number of certifcates issued
Number ofVA and TA issued with reduced validity period/ overall number of certificates issued
Number of data consumption ofregisters
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources (18)
70.05 FTEs + 10.03 additional FTE's from SAP implementation
Financial resources (19)
E3,766,092 (outofwhich E
824,000 for NSA costs &E 212,004 for POE costs)
Fee based
Partially
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(3)
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the direct operational expenditures_
For
comprehensive view on the financial resources including all costs such as staff salary, IT costs etc, please refer to Annex I.
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
41
fully
rolling

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
OOOMRA1138
NoBos monitoring
4.01
2.05
80,000
No.ofreports for NoBos audit/inspection sent to NoBos for
At least 9 reports
comments after the onsite Visit。
No.ofreports for NoBos audit/inspection delivered
At least 4 reports
Anew common framework for NoBos, DeBos and AsBo
Final draft agreed with EC as a basis for a future legislative
assessment and monitoring set up by the Agency (new legal
proposal
base may be needed)
Learning from NoBo monitoring/ Forum of best practices
Organised whenthe
1st audit cycle is at an advanced stage
No.of NoBo audits performed peryear
15
ERA1172
Harmonising
2.98
1.54
E25,000
Increased harmonisation of operations
support EC with TDD
10096of EC requests answered
railway operations
renewal
Maintenance ofTSI OPE text (Manage CRs, manage issued
1009 ofrequests treated
AMOCs, develop guidance, supporting COM)
Increased harmonisation of operations
implement new
Phased
implementation ofnew structure
structure forTSI OPE
Increased performance of and trust in MS as control level
10096 of planned MS assessed (incl. impact of earlier TOif
manage NSRs cleaning-up process 2.0 (compliance with TSI OPE
relevant)
2023, incl. impact OfTO, ifrelevant)
Increased performance of SMS
draft new regulation OfType 5
Draft new regulation
and develop guidance/ training
NSR
ERA1175
TSIs maintenance
3.55
1.03
E45,000
Working Party meeting days
CCM tool available forthe
CCM process established to ensure the maintenance ofthe TSIs
stakeholders
CRon Combined Transport
CRclosed
CRs on innovative solutions from ERJU
CRs managed in line with ERJU input
TSIINF Revision
TWG established and TSI structure agreed
TSI maintenance progress
10 CRs fnalised
Update on the guides on ERA Website
AlIguides updated
Support dissemination activities, including conferences and
Provided
traning
CCM ready for processing System Pillar
CCM implemented forallrequests
CR
measurements
Closed
CR Noise of parked trains
Closed
CRon platform/train interface
Closed
CRRIV/Dangerous goods
Closed
CR Unique Authorisations
Specifc Cases for coaches
CRs on Standards
TO EN updates
TSIas a global standard
International Strategy fnalised
TSI Dissemination Workshops
42
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Energy _

FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator 
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1177
Learning from TSIs
0.95
0.45
E8,550
Support to NOBOs
100 % Participation to NB Rail PLEand STR
Support to EC (TO/Advice/Derogations/ NoBos) within agreed
10096
deadlines
ERA1193
Researchand
0.96
E5,000
Research projects with ERA level of interest 3 (high interest)
Europes Rail JU projects of interest for the Agency monitored
Innovation (S)
monitored with yearly report
List of Europe's Rail JU projects of interest forthe Agency
10096 of JU new projects analysed
identifed
Support to the Europes Rail JU and cooperation with other
At least one written communication on the Agency's research
bodies on research
needs to the relevant bodies
ERA1209
Revision OfVA
2.62
E8,000
Proportion of problems detected during Vehicle authorisation
guides and
activities (including pre-engagement and notifcations) for which
5 VA return of experience meetings
procedures
solutions are proposed
Proportion of problems detected during vehicle authorisation
activities
(including pre-engagement and notifcations) for which
9596
solutions are proposed
Proportion of problems related to vehicle authorisation activities
(including pre-engagement and notifcations) reported by
9596
stakeholders for which solutions are proposed
ERA1210
Revision Of ERTMS
1.62
15,200
Proportion of major problems assessed with a decision following
9596
Trackside approval
the change control process
ERA1213
Board of Appeal
0.80
52,250
Issuance Of fndings and decisions ofthe Board of Appealon
(BOA)
time; according to the Agency's role as the Registrar for the Board
2959
Of Appeal
ERA1217
Business helpdesk
1.76
Improvement plan
Implemented
VA, SSCand
Proportion ofthe requests on the Agency scope ofwork
ERTMS Trackside
addressed to the business helpdesk answered within 10 working
909
approval
days for 2021
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
43

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator 
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1218
Manage ERTMS
7.92
3.64
E 250,000
CCSTSI
Enhanced framework
CCS TSI Amendment
longterm
CCSTSI
Maintenance and operational activities
Organisation Of ERA-ENISA Cybersecurity conference
eVolution
CCSTSI
Maintenance and operational activities
Organisation Of ERTMS Conference
ERTMS
Enhanced framework
Delivery of SUBSET-1 53, SUBSET-O76 and SUBSET-151
ERTMS
Enhanced framework
Delivery ofTechnical Opinion on FRMCS V2 specifcations
Publication ofthe ERTMS BCA report (incl. results Of ERA
ERTMS
Maintenance and operational activities
questionnaires) according to TSI CCS point 7.2.10 - Specifcations
maintenance
ERTMS
Maintenance and operational activities
Update of ETCS generic handbook
Support dissemination activities, including conferences and
Provided
traning
CCSTSI
Maintenance and operational activities
Publication of CCS TSI Application Guide
CCSTSI
Maintenance and operational activities (Support for
the EU-wide deployment of ERTMS, including economic impact
Requests Of CINEA- DG Move 1009 assessed
analysis to inform possible public investment prioritisation (e:g:
by CINEA))
CCSTSI
Enhanced framework  analysis on phasing out the
checks to prove the technical compatibility of on-board units
CCS TSI Article 12 - analysis delivered according to the deadline
With different ERTMS trackside implementations and to achieve
setinart. 12 CCS TSI
harmonisation of engineering and operational rules forthe SERA
ERA1221
Delivery SSC VA
8.60
E15,000
Issuing ERTMS Trackside Approvals
Proportion of decisions
10096
ERTMS Trackside
taken
according to the legal framework deadlines
approvals
Issuing Single Safety Certifcates
Proportion of decisions taken
according to the legal framework deadlines (for completeness
10096
and assessment phases)
Issuing Vehicle Authorisation, including ERTMS on-board
assessments
Proportion of decisions taken according to the
10096
legal framework deadlines (for completeness and assessment
phases)
Support dissemination activities; including conferences; training;
Provided
and webinars
44
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA
226
Registers
7.45
0.62
664,000
CCM process established to ensure a harmonised maintenance
CCM tool available for the stakeholders
Operation and
across all ERA Registers and TSIs
Development
Development ofa cloud-based tool for CR management across
allTSIs (incl. registers and various technical documents) ensuring
032025
a more User
friendly interface
Development of an approval workflow for VKMin SRM
December 2024
Development ofthe RINF Application in accordance with Article
(1) End oftesting phase 02 2024; (2) End of deployment phase
6 Of RINF Regulation (EU) 2019/777 (2023 amendments)
032024
ERADIS
processing time for ServiceDesk requests;
10 days
document publication and users support
ERADIS
Release 6.0
In production by Decemebr 2024
ERATV
% ofsubmitted records published or clarifcation requested
9596
ERATV - Avg. processing time for ServiceDesk requests and users
10 days
Support
ERATV
Release 3.0
10096 approved CRs delivered
EVR
Avg. migration time of received local NVRs (data) migrated
6 months
to EVR
EVR
Avg. processing time for ServiceDesk requests;
10 days
lettermarking codes and users support
EVR
Release 4.0
In production by December 2024
OCR
processing time for ServiceDesk requests and
10 days
Organisation Codes management
RINF
Avg. processing time for ServiceDesk requests
10 days
SAIT
processingtime for ServiceDesk requests and user support
10 working days
SAIT
Release 2.0
2024
SRD
processing time for ServiceDesk requests_
10 days
lettermarking codes and users support
SRD
Release 3.0
In production by December 2024
VKMR
Vehicle Keeper Merking list publication
Monthly publication
Setting-up and fnalisation of a pilot with volunteering IMs
supporting the development ofthe RINF Application towards
022024
automated upload of data by IMs into RINF based on existing IMs'
data models
RINF data provision dasboard
Presented to EBand MBonce a year
EVR
Agency becoming a registration entity for vehicles atthe
Workflows put in place provided the EVR legal act was amended
EUlevel
accordingly
Exploratory work for Eurocontrol for railways, including the traffic
Draft concept paper developed and discussed with EC
management and economic regulation aspects _
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
45
AVg:
Avg:
Avg:_
AVg.

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator 
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1240
Management
3.00
E14,250
At least 2 position papers
comments on SP documents
ERA contribution to the System Pillar activities
ofInnovation
delivered
and Long-term
ERA use of outputs from EU RailJU
Mature CRs from the SP integrated into the ERA CCM process
evolution ofthe
Update ofthe compelling vision published on ERA website
Agency
Technological watch activity
before 31/12/2024
ERA1243
Executing VA
18.85
E1,847.556
Executing VA
Legal deadlines and according to the process
ERA1244
Executing TA
1.80
E188,448
Executing ERTMS TA
Legal deadlines and according to the process
ERA-DRO-010
OSS releases
1.88
E545,838
Proportion of signifcant problems detected during operation for
9596
Which solutions are available in a next release_
ERA-PRG-00G
National
1.30
0.70
E2,000
1009 of notifed NRs assessed according to Art 25 and 26 of ERA
Examination ofnotifed national rules for fxed installations
Technical Rules
Regulation _
management
1009 ofnotifed NRs assessed according to Art 25 and 26 of ERA
Examination ofnotifed national rules forvehicle authorisation
Regulation
Migration ofnational rules for vehicle authorisation from RDDto
AlIrules in addition to TSIs migrated
SRD
Inclusion in TSIs ofrequirements from NRs
339ofintroduced CRs Closed
46
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Strategic statement 2
Rail will become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and
will be favoured as atransport mode by the new generations。
Strategic statement 3
Rail traffc will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as a Service) and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will be
ensured, including multi-leg ticketing。
Improved synergies with othertransport modes; placing railways at the core ofthe new multimodal transport system
Sustainability of railways will be further enhanced and showcased
Rail is the preferred mode oftransport of new generations
Expected outcome
Seamless rail traffc
Mobility as a service and Logistics as a service are ensured
Multi-leg ticketing supports the new multimodal transport system in the EU
Outcome indicators
The level of implementation OfTAF and TAP TSIas monitored through the annual "Safety and Interoperability Progress Report"
Note:
will be further
Evolution in share ofrail (both passenger and freight) in the EU's transport market compared to air, road or maritime transport
developed in future SPDs
GHG emission from rail compared with othertransport modes (shares %)
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources (20)
2.85 FTE + 0.10 additional FTE's from SAP implementation
Financial resources (2)
E42,538
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(3)
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
47
they

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
OOGREC1128
Managethe
1.16
18,050
Change requests included in TAF technical appendices;
042024
evolution of
according to the CCM process
Telematics
Monitoring ofthe TAFTSI implementation
progress reporton
application for
Year
022024
freight (TAFTSI)
Recommendation about the revised TAF TSI delivered to DG
2024
MOVE
Compliance assessment check requested for TSIs on telematics
1009of compliance assessment reports produced in due time
applications to include interfaces with other regulations under
3 months)
the aegis Of ERA (e9. OPETSL, RINF ERA Vocabulary)
Participation to the Commissions meetings related to the Digital
Participation to the Commissions meetings related to the Digital
Transport and Logistic Forum and eFTI Regulation
Transport and Logistic Forum and eFTI Regulation
ERA1234
Green agenda
0.10
E4038
Report published and event around the results ofthe report
Annual topical report
organised
ERA-REC-122
Manage the
1.00
0.10
10,450
Change requests included in TAP technical appendices;
Q2and 042024
evolution of
according to the CCM process
Telematics
Monitoring ofthe TAP TSIimplementation
progress report on
application for
Year
022024
passengers
TAP
Recommendation about the revised TAP TSI delivered to DG
TSI)
01/2024
MOVE
Participation to the meetings related CENITC278MG3
6096 participation based on priority topics
Participation to the meetings related to the NAPCORE project
09 participation based on priority topics
Compliance assessment check requested for TSIs on telematics
10096 of compliance assessment reports produced in due time
applications to include interfaces with other regulations under
3 months)
the aegis Of ERA (e:9.OPE TSL RINF ERA Vocabulary)
Progress With the specifcations for multi-leg ticketing_
Specifcations fnalised
Ontology extended to allow for data upload for the Inventory of
End 2024
assets
ERA-IKG-015
TDG Coordination
0.59
E10000
No.of meetings where ERA supports the ECin accordance with
15
the ARart。 17.
48
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Strategic statement 4
Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure mode of transport for its users and workers。
Improved safety and security on rai
Improved safety and security for rail workers
The expected outcomes are further detailed to the following intermediate outcomes more directly linked to the Agency's safety portfolio:
Expected outcome
7.AII railway operators
IM, RU, ECM
understand and accept theirresponsibility and actively implement an SMS to control the risks of operational activities;
8
An increased performance ofand trust in the different Safety related control levels in the system
ERA, MS, NSA, ASBO,ECM CB, accreditation, recognition;
9.NIB;Safety and safety management/performance related data is shared in an open and transparent way;
Numberof open type 3 issues when issuing SSC's/ overall numberof certificates issued
Number of SSC's issued with reduced validity period/ overall number of certificates issued
Outcome indicators
Numberofappeals made by operators in a year linked to SSC certifcation/ average numberof SSC's issued peryear
Percentage of NSAs audited with at least
deficiency (focused on defciencies still open from the 1st cycle). Note: this is a rolling indicator
Note: they will be further
NSA Monitoring: number of deficiencies still open (follow-up ofthe 1st cycle) Vs number of deficiencies of the 1st cycle (rolling indicator) Note: this is a rolling
developed in future SPDs
indicator
Number of peer reviewed NIB's
Number ofvolunteering NIBs to participate in the NIB peer review / total number of NIB's (on a yearly basis)
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources
28.65 FTE's + 4.13 additional FTE's from SAP implementation
Financial resources
E1,258,487 (out ofwhich E 744,000 for NSA costs & E 134,484 for PoE costs)
Fee-based
Partially
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(33}
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
49

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
001MRA1116
NSA
Monitoring
4.62
2.26
E160,000
No.of audit reports delivered
At least 4
implementation
No.of audit reports sent to NSA for comments after the onsite
At least 6
Visit
Support dissemination activities, including conferences, training;
Provided on request
and webinars
Observation OfNSA Supervision activities e.9. RUs where the
To be included in the NSA monitoring service; When relevant
Agency has issued the SC
No.OfNSA audits performed
Proper learning from the NSA monitoring
Follow-up of defciencies ensured
004SST1088
Develop Safety
1.93
E41,500
Delivery of the report on the development of a safety culture
Report delivered
Culture
according to Art. 29 (2) of Directive (EU) 2016/798
ERA1167
Sustainable safety
5.16
E36,250
Strengthen ASBO control level
coordination Of ASBO (meetings;
3 working group meetings organised, 3 technical meetings
management
RFU development etc )
organised, support material published/delivered
Strengthen ASBO control level
Development of assessment
scheme for Assessment bodies (CSM RA)and Collaboration with
3 work group and 3 task force meetings organised
EA
IC (European cooporation for accreditation
Inspection
committee)
Support material published or delivered (in collaboration
Strengthen ECM control layer
develop; deliverand maintain
With ERA Academy): Revision of the guideline initiation (to be
guidance material on ECM certifcation
continued in 2025 and 2026), Data collection through ECM
SUrVey
Strengthen ECM control level
coordination Of ECM certifcation
3 coordination meetings organised
bodies (meetings; RFU development etc)
Strengthen SMS - develop deliver and maintain guidance
Support material published or delivered (in collaboration with
material on SMS (incl. app, website; etc)
ERA Academy)
3 EUDG Sub Group meetings organised (Harmonised scenarios;
Strengthen SMS - develop, deliver and maintain guidance
material on TDG risk management
Risk Management Platform development) organised, support
material developed
Strengthen SMS (TDG)
coordination of EUDG meetings
2 EUDG plenary meetings organised
Strengthen SMS (TDG)
development ofthe Risk Management
RMP proof-of-concept/Beta V3.1; reference manual V3.1
Platform (RMP)
ERA1168
Learning
1.35
E5,000
Strengthening NIB control layer
bilateral feedback provided to #
1009 delivered on request
from safety
NIB (possibly to be combined with NIB peer review)
performance
Strengthening SMS
study on the potential use of operational
study started
data for safety management
50
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1208
Revision ofSSC
1.32
8,000
% of change requests implemented following the decision from
9596
and
the change control board to execute them during the year
procedures
Collection of feedback identifcation of lessons learnedand
5 SSC plenary meetings and 2 Peer Review Group meetings
possible improvement for ERA guides and procedures
ERA1219
Common Safety
3.50
1.87
8,503
Support to Operators and Authorities
Satisfaction of railway stakeholders
Methods on
Training activity
Training material delivered and experienced
Assessment
Technical Opinion on Annex
updated according to the lessons
of Safety Level
CSM Development
learned
and Safety
Performance
CSMguidance/training
Guide on ISS functioning published
GOA/JNS fast track procedure
GoAJJNS proposal
GOA/JNS normal track procedure
GoA proposal & ERA follow-Up report
Management of the Group of Analysts
Implementation of GoA workplan during CSM ASLP phase
Support to implementation of CSM ASLP and ISS users (24)
Business support to ISS Users
ERA1224
Support to NIB
0.33
14,250
ERA to attend as observer at least remotely, to the meetings of
Attend to, at least, 5096 of NIBs Peer Review meetings
Peer Review
NIB Peer Reviewed
Report on the frst peer review Cycle
Report delivered
ERA1236
Integration of
1.19
10,000
HOF Collaboration With organisations and research institutes in
Collaboration on HOF topics to build and share knowledge
Humanand
railways and other Safety domains
Organisational
Active collaboration in development/promotion of RailHOF
Factors
Dissemination on HOF topics
platform
Dissemination on HOF topics
bi-annual HOF conference
Dissemination on HOF topics
HOF network meeting_
Develop HOF-expert competency framework (TF to set up after
Training on specifc HOF topics
agreement of HOF networkin 2023)
Review ofthe HOF toolkit and associated documentation/
Training on specifc HOF topics
training 2 years after publication
ERA1242
Executing SSC
7.20
E877.484
Executing SSC
Legal deadlines and according to the process
Depending
onthe progress made with the ISS system implementation (also linked to the outcome ofthe SOS paper)
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
51
guides

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator 
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1249
Safety Trainings
2.05
97.500
Assistance delivered according to the request assessment
10096
and Assistance tO
Requests for assistance assessed
10096
Rail Stakeholders
Requests for Safety trainings asessed _
10096
STARS)
Trainings delivered according to the request assessment
10096
52
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Strategic statement 5
Rail will be resilient and agile in responding to emergency situations
Resilience ofthe rail sector to emergency situations and external events
Expected outcome
Agility ofthe rail sector to respond quickly and efficiently to emergency situations _
Outcome indicators
The indicators will be developed in future SPDs, as no projects will contribute to the achievement ofthe statementin 2024_
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources
0 FTEs
Financial resources
E0
Fee-based
No
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
53

Annual Work programme 2024
Strategic statement 6
Rail will become increasingly economically competitive as a mode and as a sector。
Expected outcome
Economic competitiveness ofthe rail sector compared with other modes oftransport
Evolution in rail traffc in absolute terms
Outcome indicators
Proportion of rail vs road and air transport; for passenger and freight rail in the EU
Note:
will be further
Numberof pax-km per passengertrain-km
developed in future SPDs
Numberoftonne-km per freight train-km
Average ERTMS costs (trackside and on-board
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources (25)
3.28 FTE
Financial resources (26)
E80,400
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(36}
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
54
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
they

FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1188
Impact
1.05
15,200
Numberofimpact assessments delivered for recommendations
Numberof IAs corresponds to the number recommendations
assessments
and opinions
delivered
numberof opinions issued
Task Force Report endorsed by ESG
Report delivered tothe ESG by December
IA on TSI specifc cases
Delivered byend 2024
ERA1189
Ex-post
0.56
E3,325
Numberof completed ex-post evaluations
At least one
evaluations
ERA1195
Reporting on
0.78
9,500
Annual assessment report on
achievements Of CSTs
31/03/2024
Railway System
Report on Safety and Interoperability
Available by end of02
ERA1196
Dataand
0.74
E52,375
Complete the targeted studies that are selected by the MT
Twotargeted studies
information
Contribute to follow-up activities of the ERA Safety Climate
analysis
Survey, including the drafting ofthe safety culture report for the
Delivery to the EC by 16/06/24
EC
ERA1223
Womenin
0.15
Thematic session WiT with the Agency's management team
Organised
transport
Thematic session WiT with the Agency's staff
Organised
Speed networking event fndings
Analysis performed and actions drawn
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
55

Annual Work programme 2024
Strategic statement 7
The EU will become the global reference for rail and ERA authorisations will be globally recognised。
The EUis a global reference for railway certifcations and integration
Expected outcome
ERA authorisations are recognised worldwide
Outcome indicators
Note:
will be further
Number of participants in ERA training sessions and other dissemination events
developed in future SPDs
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources
10.22 FTE + 0.80 additional FTE's from SAP implementation
Financial resources (28)
E1,419,298
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
(28}
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
56
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
they

FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1145
ERA Academy
3.58
1,039,930
Implementation ofthe Academy related section ofthe
Implemented as planned
Communication and dissemination plan
ERA1147
Coordination
2.11
60,000
Collaboration With OSJD
Ensured
ofinternational
Collaboration With OTIF
Ensured
relations
Engagement with other international regulation bodies (Platform
Ensured
ofregulators)
Support to ECin wider international engagement
Ensured
ERA1148
Networks
1.03
E47500
Networks
NIB cooperation
Organised
Networks
NRB management and coordination
Organised
Networks
NSA Network
Organised
ERA1161
Online corporate
2.05
E214,368
Implementation of changes on the Agency's website
quarterly
communication
Linkedln
Number of original posts
At least 6 posts per month
Moodle platform availability
9796 (excluding maintenance)
Organising Webinars
At least 8 webinarslyear
Twitter
Numberof original posts
At least 10 posts per month
Twitter
Number ofretweets
At least 12 retweets per month
Website availability
9796 (excluding maintenance)
YoUTube
Numberof original videos
At least 2 videos per month
ERA1163
Publications
1.20
E47,500
Creating and implementing communication campaigns aiming
2 Communication Campaigns
management
at explaining ERA's mission, activities and added value
Strengthening and keeping the consistence Of ERA corporate
2 internal trainings delivered to ERA Staff
design
ERA1178
Collaboration
0.25
0.80
E10,000
Assessment ofthe new standard version to be referred to in TSIs
New version assessed within the agreed deadlines
with European
ERA-UIC coordination
2 meetings held
and international
Participation to the meeting related (RASCOP CLCTTCOX CENI
standardization
509 participation based on priority topics
TC256, ISOTTC269,ISOITC2O4,IECTTC9, ETSI)
organizations
Draft EC request for EN standards
Provided
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
57

Annual Work programme 2024
Strategic statement 8 - The Agency will ensure an effective and effcient governance Of its portfolio of activities in order to offer the best
Value for money to citizens and business in the EU
Effective and efficient governance of the Agencys portfolio
The Agency's activities provide value for money guaranteed to EU citizens and businesses across the EU
The expected outcomes have been further detailed in the following intermediate outcomes:
Digitalisation ofthe Agency: Single source of data for internal access; Single source of data for external access; Data is only introduced once
2.Staff understand the mission and vision ofthe Agency; internalise it and have the flexibility, the ownership/ autonomy With their activities,and a clear mutual
understanding of their roles and responsibilities to actively contribute to the strategic direction of the Agency
3. The Agency has a sound and agile governance framework;, whose processes and administration favour clarity, effciency and decision making at the right
Expected outcome
level。
4. The SPD process steers the Agency' strategy and multi-annual work programme development in an integrated, evidence-based,and coordinated manner
as Wellas the monitoring of its effectiveness. This can be achieved through interfacing with the internal stakeholders owning the strategies and the external
stakeholders (EC, EB strategic calendar; etc)
5.SPD is the single reference (for internal and external stakeholders) for all critical tactical information providing the
overarching view on the implementation of
the projects and services
6. The Agency is a learning, ethical, legally complying organisation where the decision-making, the strong fnancial control, the monitoring and reporting
processes give the ED the assurance of best Value for money
Budget discipline (% of deviation from annual budget)
Outcome indicators
Data is FAIR, measured on a scale
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources
27.75 FTE's + 1.63 additional FTE's from SAP implementation
Financial resources (30)
E808,416
Fee-based
No
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV。
The fnancia
resources shown here only take into account the operational expenditures. For a comprehensive view on the financial resources
including all costs such as staff salary; IT costs etc, please refer to Annex
58
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

FTEfrom 
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1154
Supporting EB
1.30
E76,000
% of mandatory decision topics for year N covered by the EBIMB
10096
and MB meetings
meetings
ERA1156
Organisational
7.29
E156,000
Budget planning; monitoring and reporting
>959 ofexecution of C8 payment appropriations
strategic
Budget planning: monitoring and reporting _
>959 of payments made by contractual deadline
programming
10096 of budget transfers approved in line with ERA Financial
monitoring and
Budget planning; monitoring and reporting
Regulation provisions
reporting
Budget planning, monitoring and reporting
Budget 2025 request encoded in BadgBudg
Budget review
At least 6 budget reviews
CAAR 2023
Adopted by MB
SPD 2024 monitoring Dashboard
Presented to MT (monthly basis) and EB/MB (at every meeting)
SPD 2024 substantial and non-substantial amendments
Adopted by MB (substantial)/ adopted by ED (non-substantial)
First draft endorsed by MB in January and fnal document
SPD 2025-2027
adopted by MBin November
MB workshop organised and workshop report circulated to the
SPD 2026
2028
participants
Strategies identifed, steered and monitored
%ofinternal/ external requests for corporate performance
10096
related data and information addressed
Budget planning, monitoring and reporting
<100of carry-over of payment appropriations forT1
Budget planning; monitoring and reporting
<200 of carry-over of payment appropriations forT2
Budget planning. monitoring and reporting
<309ofcarry-over of payment appropriations for T3
Budget planning. monitoring and reporting
>989 of appropriations committed
%offull time administrative equivalent work streamlined
Ensure projected administrative FTE decrease in line with the SAP
through effciency gains
% of SAP vacancies flled considering budget constraints _
10096
% of SAP indicators/ targets foryear N+1
On
policy priority areas
10096
included and resourced in adopted SPDNt1
Topics for which the SAP Task Force made progress:
Workload analysis and process leaning, 2. matrix and portfolio
Progress made forall topics
management review, 3.training and capacity building, 4. budget
5. synergies
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
59

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1158
Internal
3.80
% ofnonconformities identifed for which corrective/preventive
10096
Managementand
actions are identifed
Control System
Agency' most signifcant risks identifed and assessed. Remedial
Documented and reported in CAAR
actions plans in place。
Agency's processes management
% of Agency processes
2096
revised in line with the ICF and leaning objectives
Audit implementation_% of IAS/ECA recommendations
10096
implemented in line with the action plan
Documented assessment of the effectiveness ofthe Internal
Prepared and included in the CAAR
control framework
Financial verifcation_ Residual error rate following ex-post
<29
Control
ERA1159
Legal support
2.10
% of legal acts issued by the Agency, as defned by the Agency
10096
regulation, for which legal advice Was provided
ERA1160
Accounting
1.20
Accounting
Opinion in the CoA annual report on reliable
Positive
Agency accounts
ERA1162
Medialpress
0.70
28,500
Consolidating media relations management
Developing Media relations plan for 2024
relation and crisis
Develop narratives and
messages for ERAs domain of activity
management
Consolidating media relations management
(ERTMS, TSI, safety, F&C, monitoring and analysis)
Consolidating media relations management
Weekly media monitoring
Reinforcing ERA's ability to communicate effectively during
Conduct one internal lesson learnt exercise
Crisis
Reinforcing ERA's ability to communicate effectively during
Review and improve crisis communication processes
Crisis
Reinforcing ERA's ability to communicate effectively during
One training provided to the Crisis Communication Team
Crisis
Increased engagement with media
At least one press
briefng to be organized in 2024
Increased engagement with media
6 Press Releases to be published in 2024
Dedicated Press Room to be further developed on ERA's website;
Increased engagement with media
facilitating constructive dialogue with media representatives
60
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
key

FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1205
Procurement
3.02
E2,500
No.Of procurement procedures timely organised out ofthe
Service
total number of procurement procedures planned in the annual
>909
procurement plan
ERA1222
Ethics service
0.13
% of Agency's staff trained on antifraud and Ethics
at least 159 pereach type oftraining
% ofannual declaration of interests (Dol) submitted by staff
at least 90%
members
ERA1225
Management
1.50
Communication of SPD outputs for Which risks cannot be
9096 of project outputs that will not be fully achieved
controland
mitigated within Agency's control
communicated to the Management team
support Of ERA
Monthly reports for Agency's projects and services
9596 collected
portfolio of
Projects at risk of not achieving SPD outputs identifed, causes
projects and
10096 of mitigation measures proposed and implemented for
analysed, mitigation measures proposed and implemented by
services
projects at risk by the PM/SM, PO/SO
the PM/SM, PO/SO
ERA1227
Interoperable data
3.44
1.63
E540,666
Data and telematics conference
Done by December 2024
Linked data programme implementation towards a data-centric
Reference data management procedure defned.
organisation。
Linked data programme implementation towards a data-centric
ERA vocabulary covers Safety related data (ofthe Agencys
organisation。
relevant information systems)
Linked data programme implementation towards a data-centric
ERA vocabulary covers CCS TSI related data over railway
organisation:
infrastructure data
Operation and availability ofthe KG and its services
959 system availability
Support dissemination activities, including conferences and
Provided
traning
Migration of registers into a knowledge graph approach
EVR data migrated and in sync with the master database
Migration plan for the individual registers to a linked data
Migration plan fnalised, based on legal requirements and
approach, including the standardization of terminology through
business cases
the ERA
terminology:
1.Ontology implemented
2Basic User interface
Preliminary work for ISS-Stage
3Machine to machine capability tested
4Pilot chatbot for natural language queries ofthe knowledge
graph
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
61

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1228
Internal
0.80
Odd years: SES organised, action plan developed and approved/
communication
Staff engagement survey
Even years: closing of at least 7096 of the follow-up actions from
lifecycle
theaction plan
ERA1231
DPO (Data
0.20
Percentage of pieces ofadvice and consultation provided on
10096
Protection Officer)
time
ERA1235
Better together
0.53
E4,750
Understanding the evolution Of ERAs culture following the
ERA's culture reassessed
at ERA
implementation ofthe change plan
ERA1239
SUMMA
0.99
First level support provided within 24 hours (either solution
Support to the implementation of SUMMA within the Agency
implementation
provided orescalation to DG BUDG)
at ERA
SUMMA related trainings (in house and Commission-organised)
delivered
ERA1247
Efficient Vehicle
0.75
VA C2T applications: involvement with EVA prototype (internal
10by 04/2024
Authorisation
EUAR Users)
62
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Strategic statement 9
The Agency will ensure a performant working environment; based on high-quality motivated human resources
and a collaborative behaviour
Performant working environment at the Agency
Expected outcome
Collaborative behaviour showcased through all processes and deliveries ofthe Agency
High-quality service delivery
Staff satisfaction (evaluated through the Staff Engagement Survey or own survey With the same scope and questions)
Highly trained
(checked through dimensions training performance such as the evolution Of hours recorded on training in MS Project training budget;
Outcome indicators
numberof PITrequests)
Note: they will be further
HR strategy action plan progress
developed in future SPDs
Overtime
% worked above the 40 hours/week on a monthly basis, over
1096)
Cloud migration
infrastructure migrated to the cloud
ICTstrategy action plan progress
Expected resource envelope:
Human resources (3)
26.69 FTE
Financial resources
E1,180,625 (Title 3 &4.3) +E2,687,000(Title 2 &4.2) =>E3,867,625
Fee-based
Partially
()
The human resources are shown in FTE, not headcount. For more information, please refer to Annex IV:
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
63
Staff

Annual Work programme 2024
FTEfrom
Budget
Project Name
FTE
SP
Output indicator
Output Target
SP
assigned
ERA1201
ICTService
10.91
1,060,000
Average yearly availability of the Critical IT systems
9596
from
Average yearly availability of the Essential
Systems
9596
relevant
Average yearly availability of the Necessary IT systems
9396
chapters in
Production environment of ARES put in place. Internal
T3/4.3 +E
01
coordination on ARES implementation within the Agency
1,340,000
from
relevant
ServiceDesk user satisfaction feedback
Good/Excellent" rate
>709
chaptersin
T2/4.2
ERA1202
FM Service
7.35
E1,347,000
Execution of evacuation exercise at the ERA HQ
At least 1 exercise peryear
from
relevant
ServiceDesk users' satisfaction feedback
Good/Excellent"
>709
chapters in
rate
T2/T4.2
ERA1203
HR Service
7.63
E625
% implementation ofthe establishment plan
9896
96
implementation ofthe external personnel plan (CAs and SNEs)
>989
9 Ofstaff turnover
Lowerorequal to 59
ServiceDesk Users' satisfaction feedback "Good/Excellent" rate
>709
ERA1251
Securis@ERA
0.80
E120,000
Percentage of information assets in the inventory which have an
9596
Up-to-date risk assessment
64
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Very
"Very

Methodological note:
A. FTEs
the resources are planned for the Strategic Statements (in line with the enve-
lopes shown above), as well as for ERA Management and administration。
The table shows in
separate column ("Additional FTEs from SAP") the allocation ofthe
additional resources envisaged in the EC proposal (12 TAs).
The margin up to the maximum establishment plan accommodated the difference be-
tween headcount and FTEs (e.9. part time work etc)
Additional
Strategic statement
FTE
Total FTE
FTEs from SAP
Strategic statement
70.05
10.03
80.08
Strategic statement 283
2.85
0.10
2.95
Strategic statement 4
28.65
4.13
32.78
Strategic statement 5
Strategic statement 6
3.28
3.28
Strategic statement
10.22
0.80
11.02
Strategic statement 8
27.75
1.63
29.38
Strategic statement 9
26.69
26.69
ERA Management and administration
16.92
16.92
Total
186.41
16.69
203.10
B
Budget
the fnancial resources are planned as follows:
Note onthe linkto
Feesand
Expenditures
the PIS fromthe
EU Subsidy
Total
annual section
charges
These are not included
in the P/S budget
Staff costs
22,654,387
7,633,433
E30,287,819
envelopes in the annual
sectionabove
These are includedin
Infrastructure
the budget for the ICT
operating
E2,146,913
E540,087
E2,687,000
service and the FM
expenditure
service (StSt 9)
These are included in
Operational
the budget forall the
E3,969,280
3,526,576
7.495,856
expenditure
P/Sin StStl
StSt 9
Outofwhich costs
Allocated by ERA
forNSAs forthe
2,568,000
E2,568,000
P/S (ERA1242,1243,1244)
F&C
Outofwhich Costs
Allocated by ERA
345,488
345,488
for POE forthe F&C
P/S (ERA1242,1243,1244)
Meetings;
Not allocated by ERA
missions, other
E50,986
E50,986
P/S
Costs
Other
Allocated under the ICT
operational
846,940
E213,060
1,060,000
service in StStg
expenditure
TOTAL
29,668,506
E11,913,156
E41,581,662
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAMME 2024
65

IV.Annexes

Annex |.Organisational chart
Figure 1
Organisational chart as Of 01/01/2024
Executive Director (ED)
Railway Systems (RSY)
Department
Rolling Stock & Fixed
EDOffce
Installations (FIRST)
Accounting
Unit
Legal
Ethnics
Innovationand
Safety & Operations (SAFO)
Technology
Team
ERTMS (ERTMS)
Planning & Approvals Delivery
Monitoring; Analysis, Ressearch
Corporate Assurance &
Operational Data (OPD)
Resources & Support (RSU)
(PAD)
& Stakeholders (MARS)
Performance (CAP)
Authoehicon
(VA)
Analysis
Registers
Corporate Governance
Human Resources
Data Information &
Budget Planning;
Safety Certifcation (SSC)
Monitoring
IT & FM
Governance
Monitoring & Control
ERTMS Trackside Approval
Stakeholders Rel.
(TA)
Academy
Comms
Portfolio Management
&
Support
ORGANISATIONAL CHART
67

Annexes
Table 6
Number of posts for each organisational entity
32
EU contribution & Fees & charges
Grants, Contrib & SLAs
Department; Unit, or Team 
Grand Total 
TA
CA
SNE
C Posts
TA
CA
SNE
5 Posts
Executive Director (ED)
8
8
ED (general)
RilaySystemsLRSYI
58
63
66
RSY (general)
ERTMS & Telematics (ERTMS)
18
18
18
Rolling Stock & Fixed Installations (FIRST)
17
17
18
Safety & Operations (SAFO)
14
19
21
Planning & Approvals Delivery (PAD)
24
10
34
34
PAD (general)
7
ERTMS Trackside Approval (TA)
3
3
Portfolio Management & Support
7
Safety Certifcation (SSC)
5
Vehicle Authorisation (VA)
12
12
Monitoring, Analysis, Research & Stakeholders (MARS)
28
35
35
MARS (general)
Analysis
Monitoring
12
12
12
Stakeholders Relations; Academy & Communications
11
Operational Data (OPD)
16
22
OPD (general)
Data & Information Governance
Registers
Corporate Assurance & Performance (CAP)
14
3
18
18
CAP (general)
Budget Planning; Monitoring & Control
Corporate Governance
Resources & Support (RSU)
19
26
26
RSU (general)
Human Resources
I & FM
12
18
18
Grand Total
166
36
206
3
209
Expressed in terms of headcount, as Of 01/01/2024. This includes all posts, including vacancies _
68
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Annex I.
Resource allocation per activity
2024
2026 (33)
Table 7
Resource allocation 2023-
2026 (34)
2023
2024
2025
2026
Revenue
Activity
CA +
CA +
CA +
CA +
SOUrCe
CFTE
TA
Budgete 
SFTE
TA
Budget r 
CFTE
TA
Budgetr 
CFTE 
TA
Budgetr 
SNE
SNE (35)
SNE
SNE
EU contrib:
45.4
41.6
3.8
8,376,125
43.4
39.5
3.9
8,211,079
46.7
43.0
3.6
9,304,117
47.4
44.1
3.3
9,624,466
StSt
F&C
29.
22.3
7,451,321
33.7
26.3
7.4
8,505,519
33.7
26.5
7.2
8,711,431
33.7
26.6
7.1
8861,1
6,CSLA
3.
2.4
475,410
3.0
2.7
0.3
600,800
1.5
1.4
395,250
StSt 2-3
EU contrib:
3.6
2.9
667,943
3.0
28
535,364
3.0
2.8
545,409
3.0
28
556,769
EU contrib:
22.4
188
3.6
3,862,208
25.6
21.2
4.4
4,447,18一
23.5
19.6
3.9
4,361,31
23.
19.5
3.6
4,239,430
StSt 4
F&C
5.2
4.0
1.2
1,826,773
7.2
5.9
1.3
2,144,390
7.2
1.2
2,179,286
7.2
1.0
2,222,742
StSt 5
EU contrib:
0.0
0.0
00
00
00
0.0
0.0
0.0
00
00
StSt 6
EU contrib:
3.
564,902
3.3
3.3
635,759
3.3
3.3
647,106
3.3
3.3
659,928
EU contrib:
8.9
4.1
48
854,08-
11.0
5.9
5.
2,976,189
10.7
5.8
4.9
2,734,483
10.5
58
4.7
2,944,176
StSt
6,CSLA
1.0
0.2
0.0
00
0.0
0.0
00
StSt 8
EU contrib:
29.4
19.9
95
4,835,075
29.4
21.2
5,286,754
31.1
22.9
83
5,489,312
31.2
22.9
8.3
5,612,257
StSt 9
EU contrib:
26.5
185
80
5,049,440
26.二
20.1
6.6
5,303,205
26.9
20.1
68
5,413,661
26.9
20.1
6.8
4,448,370
EUcontrib:
168
14.5
2.3
3,009,808
88
7.6
1.3
2,272,975
8.7
7.3
1.3
1,766,477
88
7.4
1.4
2,781,717
M8A
'36)
F&C
6.3
4.9
1.4
1,554,241
8
64
1.7
1,263,247
8
6.4
1,255,088
81
6.5
1.6
1,263,637
C EU contribution
156.1
123.4
32.7
28,219,589
151.1
121.6
29.6
29,668,506
153.9
124.9
29.0
30,261,876
154.2
125.9
28.3
30,867,114
5 Fees and charges
40.6
31.2
9.5
10,859,649
49.0
38.6
10.4
11,913,156
49.0
38.9
10.1
12,145,805
49.0
39.3
9.7
12,347,496
Total EU + FRC
196.8
154.6
42.2(7)
39,079,238
200.1
160.1
40.0
41,581,662
202.8
163.8
39.1
42,407,681
203.2
165.2
38.0
43,214,609
2 Grant; Contr: & SLA
4.1
2.6
1.5
475,41078)
3.0
2.7
0.3
600,800
1.5
1.4
0
395,250
Grand Total
200.8
157.2
43.6
39,554,648
203.1
162.8
40.3
42,182,462
204.3
165.1
39.2
42,802,931
203.2
165.2
38.0
43,214,609
Staff numbers
in line with EU Draft Budget
'2.1.2 European Union Agency for Railways -
ERA"
include statutory staff only (establishment plan and external staff); as a consequence, Structural service providers, and Interim workers are not
included. External
fnanced from grant, contribution or service-level agreements are shown on separate lines
Title 1 & 2 budget distributed pro rata based on the FTE allocation.
Out of which 0.80 SNE FTE will contribute to Stst 4 and 0.75 SNE FTE will contribute to Stst 8
36}
ERA management and administration (incl. Meetings, missions, other costs)
Distribution of resources is based on the real allocation of FTEs between projects/services. While 3 CAs are envisaged for System Pillar and 1 CA for IPA in terms of headcount; other staff with TA contracts are also allocated to support these
streams Ofwork_
Amount on Grants, Contrib。
& SLAs reflect the actual cash flows, not the real staff cost
RESOURCE ALLOCATION PERACTIITY 2024
2026 ()
69
Staff

Annexes
Annex IIl. Financial Resources 2024-2026
T1.Revenue
General revenues
Table 8 - Overview ofrevenues
Revenues 
2023
2024
(EUR)
Estimated
Budget forecast
2.EU contribution
27,418,274
28,645,912
1+3+4+5.
+6+7.Otherrevenue
10,471,913
12,935,750
Ofwhich 1. Revenues from fees and charges
10,859,649
11,913,156
Ofwhich 3. Third country contribution (= EFTA)
801,315
1,022,594
Totalrevenues
39,079,238
41,581,662
Table 9 - General revenues
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
VAR 2024/2023
Revenues 
Budget
Budget
Agency request
Budget forecast
Envisaged
Envisaged
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
1 . Revenues from fees and charges
7.038,812
10,859,649
11,913,156
11,913,156
11.996
12,145,805
12,347,496
2. EU contribution*
26,278,423
27,418,274
28,645,912
28,645,912
4.59
29,218,830
29,803,207
ofwhich assigned revenues deriving from previous years'
114,224
69,639
81,821
81,821
17.59
Dm。
Dm。
surpluses
3.Third countries contribution (incl. EEA/EFTA and
656,721
801,315
1,022,594
1,022,594
27.69
1,043,046
1,063,907
candidate countries)
ofwhich EEA/EFTA (excl. Switzerland)
656,721
801,315
1,022,594
1,022,594
27.69
1,043,046
1,063,907
ofwhich candidate countries
4.Other contributions
5. Administrative operations
ofwhich interest generated by funds paid by the
Commission by way ofthe EU contribution (FFR Art. 61)
6. Revenues from services rendered against payment
10,000
7. Correction of budgetary imbalances
Totalrevenues
33,983,956
39,079,238
41,581,662
41,581,662
7.09
42,407,681
43,214,609
70
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Additional EU funding: grant, contribution and service-level agreements
Table 10
Overview onadditional EU funding
2023
2024
Revenues 
Budget
Budget forecast
(EUR)
(EUR)
Total revenues
475,410
600,800
Table 11
Additional EU funding: grant, contribution and service-level agreements
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
VAR 2024/2023
Revenues
Budget
Budget
Agency request
Budget forecast
Envisaged
Envisaged
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Additional EU funding stemming from Grants (FFR Art.7)
247.450
pm.
Pm.
Additional EU funding stemming from Contribution
10,000
475,410
pm.
600,800
126.496
395,250
pm.
Agreements (FFR Art. 7)
Additional EU funding stemming from Service-Level
Agreements (FFR Art. 43.2)
Total
257,450
475,410
pm
600,800
126.49
pm
pm
Forthe list ofagreements and further details, refer to Annex XI Plan for grant contribution or service-level agreements.
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 2024-2026
71

Annexes
T2.Expenditure
Expenditure
Table 12
Expenditure
Expenditure
2023
2024
(EUR)
Commitment 
appropriations
Paymentappropriations
Commitment appropriations
Payment appropriations
Title
Staff expenditure
23,473,646
23,473,646
22,654,387
22,654,387
Title 2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
2,096,800
2,096,800
2,146,913
2,146,913
Title 3
Operational expenditure
2,649,143
2,649,143
4,867.206
4,867.206
Total EU contribution
28,219,589
28,219,589
29,668,506
29,668,506
Title 4.1
Staff expenditure
6,647.547
6647.547
7,633,433
7,633,433
Title 4.2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
524,200
524,200
540,087
54008-
Title 4.3
Operational expenditure
3,687.,902
3,687,902
3,739,636
3,739,636
Total Fees and charges
10,859,649
10,859,649
11,913,156
11,913,156
Total EU contribution + Fees & charges
39,079,238
39,079,238
41,581,662
41,581,662
Title 5
Grant Agreements
Title 5
Contribution Agreements
475,410
475,410
600,800
600,800
Title 5
Service-Level Agreements
Total Grants, Contrib. & SLAs
475,410
475,410
600,800
600,800
Grand Total
39,554,648
39,554,648
42,182,462
42,182,462
72
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Commitment appropriations
Table 13
Commitment appropriations (EU contribution)
2024 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2022 Budget
2023 Budget
VAR 2024/2023
(EU contribution)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 1
Staff expenditure
21,966,714
23,473,646
22,654,387
22,654,387
-0.69
Salaries &allowances
21,488,714
22,941,729
22,160,605
22,160,605
-0.49
Ofwhich establishment plan posts
18,806,214
20,177,137
19,422,988
19,422,988
0.09
Ofwhich external personnel
2,682,500
2,764,592
2,737,617
2,737,617
3.09
Expenditure relating to staff recruitment
127,000
117,600
66,317
66,317
-43.69
Employer's pension contributions
Mission expenses
10,000
8,000
7.990
7.990
-0.19
Socio-medical infrastructure
50,000
60,000
44,744
44,744
25.49
Training
125,000
120,000
119,850
119,850
-0.196
External services
145,000
207,917
233,308
233,308
12.29
Receptions, events and representation
1,000
2,400
1,598
1,598
-33.496
Social welfare
20,000
16,000
19,975
19,975
24.89
Other Staff related expenditure
Title 2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
1,862,438
2,096,800
2,146,913
2,146,913
2.49
Rental of buildings and associated costs
1,082,582
990,400
916,453
916,453
-7.59
Information, communication
technologyand data processing
701,253
954,400
950,810
950,810
-0.496
Movable property and associated costs
31,826
28,800
135,830
135,830
371.696
Current administrative expenditure
3,428
27.200
19,975
19,975
-26.69
Postage
telecommunications
37,691
92,000
123,845
123,845
34.69
Meeting expenses
Running costs in connection with operational activities
Information and publishing
5,658
4,000
100.096
Studies
Other infrastructure and operating expenditure
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 2024-2026
73

Annexes
2024 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2022 Budget
2023 Budget
VAR 2024/2023
(EU contribution)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 3 - Operational expenditure
3,115,992
2,649,143
4,867,206
4,867,206
45.99
Operational expenditure
Strategic Statements
1,951,491
1,863,180
4,020,266
4020,266
57.69
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
335,055
517,460
1,117,000
1,117,000
115.99
Ofwhich Strategic Statements 2 &3
15,000
93,688
42,538
42,538
54.69
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 4
279,901
208,953
381,003
381,003
82.39
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 5
681,707
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 6
474,387
30,400
80,400
80,400
164.59
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
165,441
625,246
1,419,298
1,419,298
127.09
Ofwhich Strategic Statement8
357,800
808,416
808,416
125.99
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 9
594
120,625
120,625
20215.89
Ofwhich ERA management and administration
29,040
50,986
50,986
92.99
Other operational expenditure
1,164,501
785,964
846,940
846,940
7.89
Total
26,945,144
28,219,589
29,668,506
29,668,506
5.1%
Table 14 - Commitment appropriations (Fees and charges)
2024 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2022 Budget
2023 Budget
VAR 2024/2023 
(Feesand charges)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 4.1
Staff expenditure
3,386,620
6,647,547
7,633,433
7,633,433
14.8%
Salaries & allowances
2,885,000
6,033,542
6,781,230
6,781,230
12.49
Ofwhich establishment plan posts
2,520000
5,199,466
5,864,707
5,864,707
12.89
Ofwhich external personnel
365000
834076
916,523
916,523
9.996
Expenditure relating to staff recruitment
29,400
16,683
16,683
-43.39
Employers pension contributions
501,620
481,026
727.985
727.985
51.39
Mission expenses
2,000
2,010
2,010
0.59
Socio-medical infrastructure
15,000
11,256
1,256
25.09
Training
30,000
30,150
30,150
0.59
External services
51,979
58,692
58,692
2.99
Receptions, events and representation
600
402
402
33.09
Social welfare
4000
5,025
5,025
25.69
Other Staff related expenditure
74
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

2024 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2022 Budget
2023 Budget
VAR 2024/2023
(Feesand charges)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 4.2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
207,459
524,200
540,087
540,087
3.09
Rentalof
buildings and associated costs
108,549
247,600
230,547
230,547
6.99
Information, communication
technology and data processing
98,910
238,600
239,190
239,190
29
Movable property and associated costs
7.200
34,170
34,170
374.696
Current administrative expenditure
6,800
5,025
5,025
26.
9
Postage
telecommunications
23,000
31,155
31,155
35.59
Meeting expenses
Running costs in connection with operational activities
Information and publishing
1,000
100.09
Studies
Other infrastructure and operating expenditure
Title 4.3
Operational expenditure
3,444,733
3,687,902
3,739,636
3,739,636
1.4%
Operational expenditure
Strategic Statements
3,204,733
3,491,411
3,526,576
3,526,576
1.09
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
3,047,804
2,568,011
2,649,092
2,649,092
3.296
Ofwhich Strategic Statements 2-3
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 4
923,400
877,484
877,484
-5.09
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 5
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 6
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
156,929
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 8
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 9
Ofwhich ERA management and administration
Other operational expenditure
240,000
96,49
213,060
213,060
8.49
Total
7,038,812
10,859,649
11,913,156
11,913,156
9.79
Payment appropriations
Payment appropriations in current and planning years are identical to commitment appropriations
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 2024-2026
75

Annexes
T3.Budget outturn and cancellation ofappropriations
Table 15
Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations
Budget outturn
2019
2020
2021
2022
(EUR)
Reserve from the previous years' surplus
119,879
59,486
114,225
69,638
Revenue actually received (+)
28,644,227
30,761,007
32,834,965
34,703,739
Payments made
26,041,310
27.440,679
29,908,642
33,246670
Carry-over of appropriations
2.931,959
4,097,690
3,894.,958
3,565,238
Cancellation ofappropriations carried over (+)
54,280
106,232
30,110
40,317
Adjustment for carry overof assigned revenue appropriations from previous
335,358
785,738
1,008,478
2,150,676
year (+)
Exchange rate differences (+/)
-1,110
383
-315
1,002
Adjustment for negative balance from previous year (-)
19,879
-59,486
14,225
69,638
Total
59,486
114,225
69,638
81,821
76
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Annex IV.Human Resources 2024-2026
quantitative
T4.Staff
population and its evolution: overview ofall categories ofstaff
Statutory staffand SNE (39)
Table 16 -
Establishment plan posts
Human resources
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
FTE
corresponding
Actually flledas
Occupancy rate
Establishment plan posts
Authorised staff
Envisaged staff 
Envisaged staff
Envisaged staff 
toauthorised
Of 31/12/2022
% 
budget
Administrators (AD)
120 (40)
118
98.39
136 (4)
137
137
137
Assistants (AST)
3440
32
94.196
3041
29 (43)
29
29
Assistants/Secretaries (AST/SC)
Total establishment plan posts
154
150
97.49
166
166
166
166
FTE
FTE
FTE
corresponding
Actually flledas
corresponding
corresponding
External 
Execution rate %
Envisaged FTE
Envisaged FTE
toauthorised
Of 31/12/2022
toauthorised
toauthorised
budget
budget
budget
Contract Agents (CA)
36
36
1009
36
36 (44)
36
36
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
5096
4 (45)
Total external staff
40
38
959
40
40
40
40
Total staff
194
188
96.99
206
206
206
206
Staff financed from grant, contribution or service-level agreements not included in this table, but under Additional external staff expected to be financed from grant , contribution or service-level agreements below
(9)
One AST post converted to AD as per MB Decision n
299
2 AST converted to AD as per MB Decision n。 332
Ofwhich 27 assigned to Fees and charges
2 AST converted to AD as per MB Decision n" 332
(44)
Ofwhich 8 assigned to Fees and charges
(451
Ofwhich 0assigned to Fees and charges
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUANTITATIVE
77
Staff

Annexes
Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant; contribution or service-level agreements
Table 17
Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant, contribution or service-level agreements (46) (4)
Human resources
2023
2024
2025
2026
External staff fnanced from agreements
Envisaged FTE
Envisaged FTE 
Envisaged FTE
Envisaged FTE
Contract Agents (CA)
Dm
pm
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
Total external staff
3
pm。
pm
Other Human Resources
Table 18
Structural service providers (48)
Structural service providers
Actuallyin place as of 31/12/2022
Infrastructure
I
Service Desk
|
Security
Registers (including OSS)
Other
Software management/development
Total structural service providers
11
Table 19
Interim Workers
Interim Workers
FTEsin 2022
Totalinterim Workers
For the list of agreements and further details on the split of FTEs between these agreements, refer to Annex XI Plan for grant, contribution
Orservice-level agreements
(4)
Extension of the IPA grant agreement to 2023 under negotiation。
(48}
Service providers are contracted by
private company and carry out specialised outsourced tasks of a horizontal/support nature.
78
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

T5.Multi-annual staff policy plan 2022-2026
Table 20 - Temporary Agents
2022
2023
2024 
2025
2026
Temporary 
Authorised budget
Actually flled 31/12
Authorised budget
Request of ERA
Request of ERA
Request Of ERA
Agents
Perman
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
Perman
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
Perman。
Temporary
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
AD 16
AD 15
AD 14
AD 13
AD 12
10
AD 11
14
20
20
22
AD 10
22
20
19
15
17
21
AD 9
23
15
32
28
21
AD8
22
26
24
12
19
25
AD 7
18
16
20
23
21
17
AD 6
19 (49)
26
25
17
15
15
AD 5
(50)
10
5
TotalAD
120(49)
118
136 (50)
137
137
137
AST 1
AST 10
AST9
AST 8
2(50)
5
AST
AST G
4 (49)
5
AST5
AST4
AST 3
AST2
AST
TotalAST
34(49)
32
30 (50)
29
29
29
Total ASTISC
Total TAs
154
150
166
166
166
166
One AST 6 post converted to AD 6 as per MB Decision n。 299
(50}
2 AST posts converted to AD,as per MB Decision n。 332
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUANTITATIVE
79

Annexes
Table 21
Contract Agents
FTE corresponding
FTE corresponding
Contract Agents
Executed FTEas of
Actually flledas of 
FTE request for
FTErequest for 
FTErequest for
to theauthorised
to theauthorised
ERA staff (External personnel)
31/12/2022
31/12/2022
2024
2025
2026
budget 2022
budget 2023
Function Group IV
23
23
23
23
23
Dm
Function Group Il
Dm
Function Group
Dm
Function Group
2
Total
36
NIA
36
36
36
36
36
Contract Agents
FTE corresponding
FTE corresponding
Executed FTEas of 
Actually flled as of
FTE request for
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
External staff fnanced from 
to theauthorised
to theauthorised
31/12/2022
31/12/2022
2024
2025
2026
Grants, Contrib. & SLAs
budget 2022
budget 2023
Function Group IV
1.5
Function Group Il
Function Group
Function Group
Total
NIA
5
1.5
pm:
Table 22
Seconded National Experts
FTE corresponding
FTE corresponding
Executed FTEas of
Actually flledas of
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
Seconded National Experts
to theauthorised
to theauthorised
31/12/2022
31/12/2022
2024
2025
2026
budget 2022
budget 2023
Total
NIA
80
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

T6.Recruitmentforecasts 2024 following retirementlmobility ornew requested posts
Table 23
Recruitment forecast
Type of contract
TA / Offcial (5)
(Offcial; TA Or CA)
Jobtitle in the Agency
CA (52)
Due to foreseen retirementl
New post requested due to
Internal
External 
mobility
additional tasks
Project Offcer
TA
Engagement of additional TA and CA (Project Offcers), taking into account the priorities from the Strengthening Plan Action Plan 2023-2027
Open posts for SNEs to be filled from Calls for expression of interest published on the Agency's website
Foreseen retirementin 2024:3
Inter-agency mobility 2023: 0
Function Broup/grade of recruitment internal (brackets) and external (single grade) foreseen for publication
Recruitment Function Group (I,IL, Illand IVI
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUANTITATIVE
81

Annexes
Annex V.Human
Resources 2024-2026
qualitative
A. Recruitment (engagement) policy
Implementing rules in place
Table 24 - Implementing rules in place
Topic
Model decision
Yes 
No
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015as
Engagement OfTA
Model Decision C(2015)1509
per AB decision (see below)
Engagement ofCA
Model Decision C(2019)3016
Applied by analogy since 02/10/2019 as
per MB decision (see below)
Applied by
since 25/06/2019as
Middle management
Model decision C(2018)2542
per MB decision
Applied by analogy since 25/06/2019
Type of posts
Model Decision C(2018)8800
as per MB decision (54), revised on
30/06/2023
The following general principles guide the application of the legal framework concerning
the Agency staff:
a.)
The core of the Agency staff consists Of Temporary Agents. AII Temporary Agent
positions have been identifed as long-term positions. Due to the budgetary and
establishment plan constraints the Agency is obliged to also engage Contract
Agents in order to fulfl its mission;
b) Temporary and Contract Agents are treated equivalently as faras possible:
In addition, it should be noted the Agency does not employ offcials. However there are
cases Where EU officials have been engaged following an external selection procedure
and have therefore acquired the status ofTemporary Agent in the Agency (whilst remain-
ing an official on unpaid leave in their institution oforigin).
Selection and engagement procedures:
The procedure for selection and engagement of Temporary Agents and Contract Agents
is based on Articles 27-34 Of the Staff Regulations and Articles 12-15 and 82-84 of the
Conditions Of Employmentof Other Seryants Of the European Communities (CEOS), the
related Implementing Rules on the engagement and use of Temporary Agents and Con-
tract Agents, the Financial Regulation (Eyropean Commissiops Frpewoykand thatofthe
Agency); the CogegfGoog Administrative Behaviourand the data protection rules。
The Agency also makes use of the EPSO CAST lists accessible to Agencies forthe engage-
ment Of Contract Agents. Because Of the Agreement on the European Economic Area
nationals of Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein are eligible for working for the Agency。
MB Decision n"204 on middle management staff
MB Decision n203 on types ofpost and post titles in ERA
MB Decision n326 on types of posts and post titles
82
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
analogy

The selection procedures for the engagement ofTemporary Agents are carried out in ac-
cordance with DecisiopNo 121ofthe Agministratiye Boargofthe European RailwayAgen
Sy laying down the general implementing provisions on the procedure governing the
engagement and use oftemporary staff under Article 2(f) ofthe CEOS.
Depending on the function and the level of tasks and within the limits authorised by the
establishment plan of the Agency, Temporary Agents are engaged at the following entry
AST
to AST 4 forthe function group AST
AD 5 to AD8 for the function group AD
For managerial posts or highly specialised posts; the Agency can engage Temporary
Agents at grades AD 9and AD1O orat grade AD1 2 for Heads of Department。
The duration Of contracts for Temporary Agents is governed by Decision N
ERA-ED-
DEC-1109-2015. Staff holding a long-term post are normally offered an initial contract with
duration of four years with the possibility of renewal The standard practice for a frst re-
newal is normally for a two-year period and any further renewal is for an indefinite period.
For staff on short-term employment; the duration ofthe contract depends on the dura-
tion ofthe tasks to be carried out. At ERA, the duration ofthose contracts is predominantly
related to the availability and duration of grants, or to a specifc time determined project。
In
rare cases it is to cover long-term absences。
The Agency is launching the following types of calls, published on ERAwebsites Recruit
ment portal
Call for Interest (partial internal re-assignment): CFV/ERA/ .
Internal
Mobility for Temporary Agents-Administrators: IMERAIAD/ .
Internal Mobility for Temporary Agents-Assistants: IMIERAIASTI.
Inter-Agency Mobility for Temporary Agents-Administrators: IAMERALAD/.
Inter-Agency Mobility for Temporary Agents-Assistants: IAMIERAIAST/.
External calls for Temporary Agents-Administrators: ERA/AD/2021/.
External calls for Temporary Agents-Assistants: ERA/AST/.
External calls for Contract Agents: ERA/CA/2021 /.
Temporary agents
The ERARegulation 2016/796 which entered into force in 2016 makes no distinction be-
tween posts for long- term and short-term employment Still a post can, in accordance
With Article 16 Of Oecision N。121, be defned to be for short-term employment when it
involves tasks ofa limited duration。
The decision to renew contracts of employment of Temporary Agents occupying a
term post is taken by the Executive Director based on two considerations: the continuity
ofthe postand the competences and performances ofthe jobholder, in accordance with
Decision Nc
ERA-ED-DEC-678-2013 and the Procedure PRO_STA_O1 on the "renewaland
non-renewal of contracts of employment before the expiry date"
Ifa TA or former TA is awarded a second contract of employment in the same function
group; this contract shall be considered as a renewal in the sense of Article 8 ofthe CEOS if
the period between the end ofthe first contract and the starting date ofthe new contract
is less than 6 months. Ifthe period between the two contracts ofemployment is 6 months
or more orifthe new contract is in a different function group; the second contract ofem-
ployment shall be considered a new contract of employment。
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUALITATIVE
83
grades:
Very
long

Annexes
Contract agents
The selection procedures for the engagement of Contract Agents are carried out in ac-
cordance with Oecision 0 210 ofthe Management Board ofthe European Union Agency
on the general provisions for implementing Article 79(2) ofthe CEOS, governing the con-
ditions of employment of contract staff employed under the terms of Article 3a thereof
In accordance with Article 85 of the CEOS, contract staff can be engaged for a fixed pe-
riod ofat least three months and not more than fve years. Contract Agents are engaged
fortheir specifc competence in different areas of administration (fnance; HR; I, logistics;
legal, audit, quality management), in the railway domain or to perform manual or admin-
istrative tasks。
This type of contract is usually used to meet specifc needs such as:
Administrative tasks;
Coping with temporary peaks in workloads;
Launching projects or
new activities for which long-term commitment in
terms ofstaffing is unclear;
Replacing staff on long-term absences such as maternity leave, long-term sick
leave or unpaid leave;
However, increasingly ERA has also engaged Contract Agents for other (long-term) tasks;
SUChas:
Administrative and Logistician Support Agents
Assistants
Project Offcers
Seconded National Experts (56)
Seconded National Experts (SNEs) are staff employed by a national, regionalor local pub-
lic administration Or
public intergovernmental organisation Who are seconded to the
Agency so that it can use their expertise in
particular feld. SNEs are seconded from
their national employer to the Agency's operational units on the basis of their specifc
competency and technical expertise in the railway domain, based on Oecisionn173 of
the Management Board of the European Union Agency for Railways laying down rules
on the secondment to the Agency of seconded national experts and national experts in
professional training:
possibility to mandate 'cost-free' SNEs also exists, where the Agency does not pay any
allowances or cover any ofthe expenses related to the performance of their duties during
their secondment although the Agency does not deploy such SNEs at the moment。
SNEs assist the Agency staff and cannot perform (middle) management duties. The initial
period of secondment may not be less than six months or more than two years. It may be
renewed once Or more Up to a total
period not exceeding four years. Exceptionally; the
Agency's Executive Director may authorise one
more extension of the secondment for
the maximum duration of one year at the end ofthe four-year period. Each secondment
and extension are subject toan
exchange of letters. An SNE may be seconded once
provided that the conditions of secondment still exist and a period ofat least six years has
elapsed between the end ofthe previous secondment and the new secondment unless
the previous secondments lasted for less than four years。
SNEs are not employed by the Agency
84
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
again

Trainees
Professional traineeships last 10 months and are managed in accordance with Decision Ns
ERA-ED-DEC-1063-2015, depending on budget availability:
Structural service providers (5)
At ERA, the majority Of service providers are intra muros IT consultants:
B.Appraisal and recassifcation /promotions
Implementing rules in place
Table 25 - Implementing rules related to appraisal of performance and
reclassifcation
promotion
Topic 
Model decision
Yes 
No
Reclassification
Model Decision
Applied by analogy since 03/31/2016
OfTA
C(2015)9560
as per AB decision (see below)
Reclassification
Model Decision
Applied by analogy since 03/31/2016
OfCA
C(2015)9561
as per AB decision (see below)
Model Decision
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015
AppraisalOfTA
C(2013)8985
as per AB decision (see below)
Model Decision
Applied by
since 25/11/2015
AppraisalofCA
C(2014)2226
as per AB decision (see below)
Concerning the performance appraisals and staff reclassifcation and promotions; the
Agency applies:
Oecision N。 132 of the Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency on
general implementing provisions regarding Article 87(3) of the Conditions of Em-
ployment of Other Servants ofthe European Union
OecisionN。 133 ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency lay-
ing down general implementing provisions regarding Article 54 ofthe Conditions
of Employment of Other Servants ofthe European Union
Oecision N。 122 ofthe Administrative Board of the European Railway Agency on
the general provisions for implementing Article 43 ofthe Staff Regulations and im-
plementing the frst paragraph of Article 44ofthe Staff Regulations for temporary
staff;and
Oecision N。 123 of the Administrative Board of the European Railway Agency on
the general provisions for implementing Article 87(1 ) ofthe Conditions of Employ-
ment of Other Servants of the European Union and implementing the frst para-
graph of Article 44 ofthe Staff Regulations:
They were first implemented for the appraisal and reclassifcation exercise Of 2016. Since
2016, the Agency adopted and implemented the rules for the reclassifcation of Contract
Agents。
Structural service providers are not employed by the Agency
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUALITATIVE
85
analogy

Annexes
T1. Reclassifcation oftemporary Staff
Table 26
Reclassifcation of temporary staff
Average seniority in the grade among reclassified staff
Groupand Grade
Actualaverage over
Average over 5 
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
5 years
years (58)
AD5
2.3
2.3
2.8
AD 6
4.3
2.9
1.9
2.3
3.5
3.
28
AD 7
4.8
4.5
4.6
1.9
2.6
4.3
28
AD8
5.4
3.7
2.4
2.3
3.5
3.6
3.0
AD 9
3.8
5.6
4.5
4.7
2.7
4.3
4.0
AD 10
4.9
5.8
9.5
6.1
4.3
5.5
4.0
AD 1
4.8
4.5
4.6
4.0
AD12
3.9
3.9
6.7
AD 13
6.7
AD 14
7.9
7.9
N/A
AST
3.0
AST 2
4.3
4.3
3.0
AST 3
48
4.5
4.8
4.9
4.4
4.7
3.0
AST4
4.3
3.9
3.9
4.1
3.0
AST 5
48
3.6
2.9
3.9
4.0
4.0
AST 6
3.8
5.9
2.9
4.6
4.0
AST
4.8
3.9
3.9
4.2
4.0
AST 8
5.8
5.8
4.0
AST 9
N/A
AST 10
5.0
ASTISC
4.0
ASTISC 2
5.0
ASTISC 3
5.9
AST/SC 4
6.7
ASTISC 5
8.3
According to Decision C(2015)9563
Senior Assistant
86
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

T2. Reclassifcation of contract staff
Table 27
Reclassifcation of contract staff (60)
Staffin activity at 
How many staff members
Average number ofyearsin 
Average number ofyears in 
Function Group
Grade 
01.01.2022
were reclassifedin 2022 
grade ofreclassified staff
 grade ofreclassified staff (61)
NIA
N/A
NIA
Between 6and 10 years
16
N/A
Between 5and
years
CAFGIV
15
N/A
Between 4and 6 years
14
4.1
Between 3and 5years
13
N/A
Between 3and 5years
12
N/A
N/A
N/A
Between 6 and 10 years
CAFGII
10
N/A
Between 5and
years
4.3
Between 4and 6 years
N/A
Between 3and 5years
NIA
N/A
2.7
Between 6and 10 years
CAFGII
N/A
Between 5and
years
NIA
Between 3and 5years
3
N/A
N/A
CAFG |
2
N/A
Between 6and 10 years
N/A
Between 3and 5years
Staff fnanced from grant, contribution or service-level agreements not included in this table
(61}
According to Decision C(2015)9561
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUALITATIVE
87

Annexes
Mobility policy
Mobility within the Agency
OecisionN。 121ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency laying down
the general implementing provisions on the procedure governing the engagement and
use Of temporary staff under Article 2(f) of the CEOS (adopted on 25.11.2016) and De-
Cision nc
210 ofthe Management Board ofthe European Union Agency on the general
provisions for implementing Article 79(2) of the CEOS, governing the conditions ofem-
ployment of contract staff employed under the terms Of Article 3a thereof enshrine the
scenarios for internal mobility for TA 2(f) and CA.
The Agency considers internal mobility when vacancies arise, but due to the very specific;
technical competences ofa big part ofthe staff internal mobility remains limited.
Furthermore; members ofthe Agency staff can apply for vacant posts Within the Agency
advertised externally。
supplementary agreement in accordance with Article 10 ofthe
CEOS will be concluded as required if existing staff geta new job:
Mobility between Union Agencies
The implementing rules on the engagement and use ofTemporary Agents 2(f) and Con-
tract Agents defne the scope of mobility between EU Agencies. A very limited number
Of the support staff who have left the Agency in previous years have accepted TAJCA
positions in other Agencies。
Increasingly staff members Who took up long-term Temporary Agent positions at the
Agency come from other EU Agencies。
Mobility between the agencies and the institutions
Some posts are filled following an external selection procedure by staff coming from other
European institutions (in particular the Commission), although the number remains small
88
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

C.Gender representation
T3. Data on 31/12/2022 statutory staff (only offcials, TAs and CAs)
Table 28
Data on 31/12/2022 - statutory staff only (offcials, TAand CA)
Establishment 
Official 
Temporary
Contract Agents
Grand Total 
Level
plan posts
Staff
Staff
% 
Staff
%
Staff
% 
Administrator level
29
15.69
2.79
34
18.39
(AD + CA FGIV)
Female
Assistant level (AST +
23
12.49
4.89
32
17.29
CAFGHIII + ASTISC)
Total Female
52
28.09
14
7.59
66
35.59
Administrator level
89
47.89
18
9.796
107
57.59
(AD + CAFGIV)
Male
Assistant level (AST +
4.89
2.29
13
7.09
CAFGHIII + ASTISC)
Total Male
98
52.79
22
11.89
120
64.59
Total
150
80.6%
36
19.49
186
100.0%
External staff
Offcial
Temporary
Contract Agents
Grand Total 
Grants;
Level
Contrib. & SLAs
Staff 
% 
Staff
% 
Staff
%
Staff 
% 
Administrator level
14.39
14.39
(AD + CA FGIV)
Female
Assistant level (AST +
28.69
28.6%
CAFGHIII + ASTISC)
Total Female
42.9%
3
42.99
Administrator level
57.19
57.19
(AD + CA FGIV)
Male
Assistant level (AST +
0.09
0.09
CAFG HIII + AST/SC)
Total Male
57.19
57.19
Total
100.09
100.09
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUALITATIVE
89
from

Annexes
Table 29
Data regarding gender evolution over 5 years ofthe Middle and Senior management (62)
2018
2022
Managers
Number 
%
Number 
%
Female
14.39
209
Male
85.79
809
Total
1009
10
1009
0.Geographical balance
T4.Offcials, TAs and CAs
Table 30
Data on 31/12/2022 - statutory staff only (offcials, TA and CA)
Nationality
AD + CA FGIV
AST + CA FG HIII + ASTISC
TOTAL
Establishment plan posts
Number 
% oftotal staff
Number
% Of total staff
Number
% oftotal
Austrian
0.59
0.09
0.59
Belgian
26
14.09
18
9.796
44
23.796
Bulgarian
0.59
0.09
0.596
Croatian
2.29
0.09
2.296
Cypriot
0.59
0.09
0.59
Czech
0.59
0.09
0.59
Danish
1.19
0.59
1.696
Estonian
0.09
Finnish
0.59
0.09
0.59
French
18
9.79
14
7.596
32
17.29
German
4.89
0.09
4.890
Greek
3.89
0.59
4.396
Hungarian
1.69
0.09
1.696
(63}
Staff who is defined as middle manager by the
applicable General Implementing provisions on middle management
90
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Staff

Nationality
AD + CA FGIV
AST + CA FG HIII + ASTISC
TOTAL
Establishment plan posts
Number 
% oftotal staff 
Number 
% Of total staff 
Number 
% oftotal staff
Irish
0.59
0.09
0.59
Italian
21
11.39
2.296
25
13.49
Latvian
0.09
Lithuanian
1.19
0.09
1.196
Luxembourg
0.09
Maltese
0.09
Dutch
1.69
96
1.696
Polish
3.89
1.196
4.896
Portuguese
2.29
0.09
2.296
Romanian
3.89
2
1.19
4.896
Slovakian
0.59
0.09
0.596
Slovenian
0.09
Spanish
17
9.19
1.696
20
10.89
Swedish
0.59
0.09
0.596
British
1.69
0.09
1.696
Total
141
75.89
45
24.29
186
100.09
Nationality
AD + CA FGIV
AST + CA FG HIII + ASTISC
TOTAL
External staff fnanced
from Grants, Contrib  &
Number 
% oftotal
Number
% oftotal staff
Number 
% oftotal
SLAs
French
28.69
14.39
42.99
Italian
14.39
0.09
14.39
Romanian
14.39
14.39
28.69
Spanish
14.39
0.09
14.39
Total
71.49
28.6%
100.09
The AACC granted the Brexit exception to 5 UK Nationals as provided for in the Arts 12(2),47 and 119ofthe CEOS。
ERA may engage citizens from EEA states (Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway), but does not receive any applications from these countries。
HUMAN RESOURCES 2024-2026
QUALITATIVE | 91
Staff
Staff

Annexes
T5.Evolution over 5 years ofthe mostrepresented nationalityin the Agency
Table 31
Evolution over 5 years of the most represented nationality in the Agency- to be updated
Most represented 
2018
2022
nationality
Establishment plan posts
Number 
%
Number 
9
Belgian
41
2496
44
249
E.Schooling
Table 32 - Schooling
Noagreement is in place with a European School
Contribution agreements signed with the EC on type
European schools
No
Contribution agreements signed with the EC on type I European schools
No
Informal arrangement with EEL(M) (Ecole ewropeenne Lille Metropole)
Numberof service contracts in place with international schools:
Description of any other solutions or actions in place:
Informal arrangement with Jehan Froissart Primary Schoolin Valenciennes (EN curricula)
92
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

AnnexV.Environment
management
Executive summary
The revised SPD guidelines
require Agencies to compile and formalise their Environ-
ment management policy. To achieve this ambition, the frst Environment management
annex Was drafted in Which ERA summarised its commitmentto higher policy goals;
the measures already in place, as wellas the potential future environment man-
agement initiatives and actions; taking in consideration the responsibilities of the
Agency as
public administration body, While keeping in mind the impact Of environ-
mental initiatives on the Agency's limited human and fnancial resources. Despite these
limitations; the Agency is a socially and environmentally responsible organisation Which
pursues, whenever possible; the adoption and related implementation of environmental
measures and initiatives that can be achieved with the available means:
The Agency is committed to promote
a cUlture of
sustainability acting in
3 re
sponsible and sustainable manner
See
point 9 ofthe Eurgpean Unign Agencyfor
Railways Policy (G4). Concern for the environment and promoting a broader sustainability
agenda are integral to ERAs professional activities and the management ofthe organisa-
tion. In addition, the Agency is committed to urgently respond, within the boundaries
ofits mandate and capacity; to the ongoing energy crisis。
The Agency's aim is to follow and to promote
sustainability practice; to reduce the
environmental impacts of its activities and to help its stakeholders to do the same. The
Agencys existing environment principles (65)
are covered under the following broader
topics:
Green building
Climate protection
Environmental preferable purchasing
Transportation
Waste reduction and recycling
Sustainable resource management
ERAs wider work in the railway sector, including its authority and policy contribution to a
fully-fledged functioning Single European Railway Area, is covered under the An-
nual Work
Programme, in particular Strategic Statement 2
and the specifc project des-
ignated to "Green agenda" (ERA1234).
In addition to the broader policy context related to the Green Deal the Agency pays atten-
tion to the environmental impact of its day-to-day operations (i.e. to its building, staff
management; administration, and functioning).
ERAinthe broader policy context related to environment
As an Agency of the European Union ERA pledges to the Commissions European
Green Oeal (3) initiative:. Consequently, ERA commits to deliver its part of the dealto
make the EU's climate, energy; transport and taxation policies ft for reducing net green-
Communication C(2020)229
finalof 20.4.2020 on the strengthening of the governance of Union Bodies under
Article 70 ofthe Financial Regulation 2018/1046 and on the guidelines for the SPD and the CAAR
https: /AWW.era.europa.eu/sites/default /files/
lagencyldocsleuropean
Unlon
aency_for_railways_policy_en pdf
Currently covered in the latest Environmental
measures implemented at ERA status note (internal, 15/03/20221
The Agency is considering
green building certification for its new headquarters building project (Certification HQE
Haute Qualite Environnementalel
"RailwilTbecome the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will
be favoured as
transport mode by the new Benerations'
See hps:Lleceyrgpa:eulinfolstrategylpriorites 2olg-zOz4leurgpean-reen-deaLen
https://ec.europa.eulinfol
strategylpriorities 2019_2024Jeuropean-green-dealldelivering-european-green-deal
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
93
good

Annexes
house gas emissions by at least 5596 by 2030, compared to 1990 levels
as defned in the
EU Climate Target Plan 2030_
Since the publication Of the Communication from the Commission on the European
Green Deal (0) in December 2019, ERA has strengthened its activities aiming at promoting
the role ofthe railways in the decarbonation ofthe European transport sector. To make the
European Union the frst carbon neutral region in the world by 2050, lowering the trans-
port emissions is crucial. Between 1990 and 2019, the transport emissions have gradually
increased and reached 259 ofthe total greenhouse gas emissions ofthe EU. The transport
sector is the second sector only to the energy sector in terms ofemission。
However; looking at the same period, the emissions ofthe railway sector have gradually
decreased and nowadays represent less than 0.59 of the transport-related emissions.In
addition, railways are also the mode of transport with the lowest external costs (external-
ities):
ERA has
a central role in fostering
interoperability and safety of the rail transport Which
should eventually make it more attractive, more efficient and thereby increase the modal
share ofthe railways, resulting the greenhouse gas emissions Of Europes transport sector,
in line with the objectives ofthe EC Green Deal:
Figure 1
Sustainable mobility targets (Source: EC)
90%
reduction
greenhouse
emissions in transport by 2050
Reducing its dependence
Making
Pricing to reflect
on fossil fuels
alternative choices available
environmental impact
(
By 2030, there will be at least
Alllarge and medium-sized cities
The internalisation
30 million zero-emissions cars and
in place their own sustainable urban
Ofexternal costs
80000 zero-emission lorries
mobility plans by 2030.
Oftransport at the latest
in operation。
by 2050 will ensure
that those Who use transport

will bear the full
costs rather than leaving others
Traffic on high-speed rail
By 2030, there will be
will double by 2030_
in OUr Society to meet them.
at least 100 climate-neutral
By 2050 rail freight traffic
cities in Europe。
Will double。
Scheduled collective travel
under 500 km should be carbon neutral
by 2030 within the EU.
Transport by inland waterways and
Short sea shipping will increase
Zero-emission large aircraft will
by 259 by 2030.
become ready for market by 2035
hps:Lyintracommec eyrgpaeylnewslEurgpeangBeyond/pageslss-percent-emissions-cut-planaspxl htps:l
eC.europa.eu/clima
eu-actonleuropean-green-deall
2030-Cimate-target plan
eh
Communicaton CoM720197640 Tnalof 11.12.2019 from the Commission on the European Green Deal
94
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
gas
Dut

Figure 2
Smart mobility targets (Source: EC)
8
0
Unleash full potential
By 2030, integrated electronic
By 2030, automated mobility
Ofdata
ticketing facilitates seamless multimodal
Will be deployed on large scale。
passenger transport
Freight transport will be paperless.
Figure 3
Resilient mobility targets (Source: EC)
Transport has been one of the sectors hit hardest by the COVID-19 pandemic. The EU has now an opportunity
to build a
mobility system that is sustainable; smart, and resilient: a system for future generations。
Building a strong and resilient
Creating a mobility system
Ensuring the highest standards
Single Market:
that is fair and just for all:
0f
safety and security
in
European transport:
Investment in transport infrastructure
Make mobility affordable and accessible
across the EU Member States;
in all regions and for all passengers;
By 2050, the death toll
for all modes of transport
in the EU willbe close to Zero。
By 2050
a fully operational, multimodal
Improve the conditions
Trans-European Transport Network
for transport workers。
for sustainable and smart transport
with high speed connectivity。
ERAs wider work in the railway sector, including its authority and policy contribution to a
fully-fledged functioning Single European Railway Area, is reflected in all Agency's
strategic statements Which form partofthe Single Programming Document (multi-annual
and annual parts) The targeted conceptual work related to the Green agenda is captured
in Strategic Statement 2 (").
In 2021, ERA led by example by having been one ofthe main organisers of EuropeanYezr
OfRail2021(72),a flagship thematic initiative ofthe European Green Deal.
On the highest level, ERA also pledges to respect and act upon the United Nations
2030_Agenga_forSustainable_Developmert and the
17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).
"Rail will become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will
be
favoured as a transport mode by the new generations'
See https:/leuropa.eu/year-of- raillindex
en
https:/lec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner /detaillen/FS 20 363
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
95

Annexes
Environmentalimpacts Of ERA activities
ERAs administrative operations related to its building(s) have direct and indirect impacts
onthe environment ERA's impacton the environmentfalls underthe following categories:
1. Use Of electricity, including for heating and cooling, water paperand
stationery
2. Generation of waste and CO_ emissions
(including by travelling _
Com-
muting)
3. Land use With regards to biodiversity(3)
ERA pays attention to limiting the use of resources; taking the energy crisis into account
and
minimising negative impacts on the environment。
The recent
geopolitical developments make the environmental
and in particular ener
gy-related issues
more visible than ever before:
Accountability ceiling Of ERA
ERAis committed to do the utmost to advance its environment managementand neutral-
ise its impact on the environment. Nevertheless, it needs to be noted that due to outside
factors ERA's leverage may be limited regarding some proposed environment actions:
Current ERA headquarters building was put at the disposal Of ERA by Valenciennes Metro-
pole through a rental contract. Other buildings (meeting rooms in Lille; parking) used by
ERAare rented in office buildings and parking lots, where the environment management
responsibilities and tasks lie with the property owner or manager. In the context ofthe
Covid- 19 pandemic, the Agency has re-assessed its approach to meetings With stakehold-
ers and has limited the use of offce spaces in Lille; as well as the missions Of ERA staffand
externals to Lille headquarters。
large number ofthe Agency's meetings have been held
in remote mode, thus reducing the carbon footprint
Moreover ERAs new headquarters building project has
key focus on environmental
considerations When setting up specifications and during negotiations. The new building
project complies with the EMASIHQE recommendations。
It has to be noted that the railway link with the adjacent Belgian city of Mons is missing for
decades, With no rail service on the section between Valenciennes and the Franco-Belgian
border. Despite recent plans brought back the hope for re-establishing the connection,as
of today this condition leaves no feasible public transportation option for the signifcant
proportion Of ERA staff living in Belgium. ERA remains a vocal advocate of recommencing
cross-border railway operations as defned in its Strategic Statement
(74), With a particu-
lar focus on this particular one: Nevertheless as of
today, carbon footprint related to staff
commuting from Belgium to France needs to be mitigated with less desirable alternative
solutions; such as carpooling:
As perthe EMAS
regulation
Commission
Reygn (eyL2@18/2025 of 19 December 2018 amending Annex IV to
Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 on EMASL. Note: the premises have Timited urban green space oraccessible rooftop
to be considered for significant improvement of its biodiversity。
"There will no longer be any technical and operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail,
assets can be reused throughout Europe
96
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Environment management initiatives and actions completed in 2023
Action
Area
Target
Status
Additionalinformation
Reducing temperature in the building as agreed/
A.Consumption ofresources
In December 2022,3096 ofsavings compared to
recommended by French authorities, with no possibility for
immediately
RSU/FM
Done
(energy & utilities)
December 2021.
additional electric heating devices
Repairlreplace faulty sensors to solve lights always onin
A.Consumption ofresources
immediately
RSUIFM
Done
some offces
(energy & utilities)
Reduce/stop heating and cooling in underutilised spaces,
Consumption ofresources
HVAC programmed to stop at 10:00 if staffis not
012023
RSU/FM
Done
allow for settings management at office level
(energy & utilities)
present (winter
spring)。
Adjust auto-off settings of lights, reducing light level
whenever possible; add manual switches for "hard off" (not
A.Consumption ofresources
012023
RSUIFM
Done
even activated with motion sensor), consider lights off
(energy & utilities)
beyond working hours
Remove some neon tubes and/or replace them with LEDin
A.Consumption of resources
022023
RSU/FM
Done
Neon tubes replaced by LEDin the parking space_
garage
(energy & utilities)
A.Consumption of resources
(energy & utilities)
The campaign on composting has been done
B. Reduction of carbon footprint
Will be done
Internal communication campaign on various topics such:
(possibility to
composters at lower price with
related to staff commuting
042023
MARS/SAC
bythe end of
energy efficiency, cycling to work and composting
Valenciennes Metropole). The two other campaigns
Corporate Social Responsibility
the year
will be launched Mid-October
(CSR), staff involvementin
environmental issues
B. Reduction of carbon footprint
Purchase of bike repair station (or repair kit with pump)
022023
RSU/FM
Done
pump and a repair kit available upon demand。
related to staff commuting
Replace bottled waterat events with alternative; less Waste
generating means
distributing ERA-branded reusable
F Waste generation reduction,
This is now a standard practice (e.9. last Rail safety
Continuous
MARSISAC
Done
water bottles, order of returnable bottle products with a
sorting and recycling
days in Tallinn):
deposit fee)
Include recyclable packaging in the criteria ofthe catering
F Waste generation reduction,
Contract
RSU
Done
This is now a standard practice_
contract
sorting and recycling
renewal
Set-up of ERA Environment (Volunteering) Group to drive
Corporate Social Responsibility
dissemination actions, collect ideas and push for the progress
(CSR), staff involvementin
012023
CAP
Done
Quarterly coordination meetings, 10+ membership:
ofenvironment actions
environmental issues
Promotion of the transition rally organised as part ofthe
Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR), staff involvementin
032023
MARS
Done
Active involvement of some ERA staff
European week of sustainable development in Valenciennes
environmental issues
Corporate Social Responsibility
Blood donation organised with ERA
(CSR), staff involvementin
022023
ERA
Done
environmental issues
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
97
Coor。 
buy
(e9.
staff

Annexes
Environment managementachievements of ERA until 2022 (75)
2022
Implementation Of SYSPER having in
View the digitalisation of formerly
pa-
per-based processes and reduce paper Use
Reduction in the number of missions and limited use ofthe Lille premises
Donation of old laptops to local charities and associations through the Mairie de
Valenciennes
2021
Introduction ofthe new SharePoint system
having in view the advancement of
DMS digitalisation and reduction of paper use
Suspension ofstaff missions and in-house ERA events, only allowing the absolutely
essential ones, when possible, organising them online instead as a consequence
Of Covid-19 pandemic
Providing ERA branded cloth masks through Better Together project (to reduce
use Of surgical masks)
Reusable water bottles provided for the participants Of the Rail Safety Days 2021
event instead of disposable cups
2020
Substitution ofthe purchase of single use plastic cups for paper cups
Participation of the Agency at the virtual EU interinstitutional Greening Network
meeting
Suspension ofstaff missions and in-house ERA events, only allowing the absolutely
essential ones; when possible; organising them online instead as a consequence
Of COVID-1g pandemic
2019
Installation Of LED lighting systems in the HQ ground floor corridor
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
2018
Refurbishment ofall meeting rooms in the ERA HQ (installation of LED lighting
systems inside the MTG A131, 8003-8005,8016,B017,and 8018).
2017
Installation of recycling stations for offces supplies in the ERA HQ
Purchase ofeco office
supplies and LED desk lamps
Communal areas ofthe HQ refurbished with eco-friendly material
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
2016
Installation of recycling stations in the HQ
Replacement of old fridges with new ones consuming less energy
Deployment of power off scripts for laptops left powered on
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
Based on the Environmental measures implemented at ERA status note (internal) , complemented with other
achievements
98
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

2015
Implementation of recycling and sustainable purchases Via two catering contrac-
tOrs
Recycling workshop from the French local authorities to explain the recycling in
France organized by FMattended by colleagues within ERA (23/04/2015)
2014
Installation of the recycling station at the canteen, plastic cup collection station;
plants in the reception and library, installation of recycling bins in the meeting
rooms at the headquarters
ERA started the gradual introduction of paper orders that have environmentally
friendly label (Ecolabel/Blauer Engel), and also labelled FSC. By today ERA purchas-
es
products labelled "FSC Recycled" (manufactured with 10096 recycled fbre of
Which at least 85 percent is PCW recycled material).
Environmentmanagementinitiatives and planned actions
2024 will be
transition year for ERA in the way initiatives linked to limit its envi-
ronmental impact will be apprehended. Initiatives and actions will continue to be
launched and implemented.In addition to that; indicators will be developed per
main areas Of actions (consumption of resources; mobility; public procurement;
waste management and offce space) which will then be used from 2025 onwards。
Methodological notes:
The actions listed in the sections below which require a budget envelope will start witha
budget estimate as a pre-requisite. Budget availability will be assessed for those actions
before proceeding with the implementation。
2
Depending on the interest expressed for the volunteering group referred in part L,this
group can assist with other actions listed in parts A-.
3. While some ofthe units/teams are referred in the column ofresponsibilities by the nature
of their role in the organisation, the successful implementation of the strategy relies on
the ownership and involvement ofall
members。
Consumption of resources (energy & utilities)
ERA collects and analyses information related to the consumption of
electricityand water。
Pareto analysis ofenergy consumption will be conducted to pinpoint the critical points
to concentrate on and put efforts in frst. Based on this information ERA will identify any
possible action to decrease the consumption.
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Promote the use of"personal carbon footprint tool
012024
MARS/SAC
Perform a carbon footprint impact of ERA's activities _
032024
RSUIFM
Continue to procure green energy
rolling
RSU/FM
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
99
Staff

Annexes
Reduction of carbon footprint related to staff commuting
ERA to analyse the provision of local public transport passes to staff
startingin 2023。
ERA Willanalyse analogous schemes at Commission and other Agencies and evaluate the
feasibility Of providing local public transport passes to staff (Or retrospectively reimburs-
ing staff for these passes) to further encourage staff to use public transport and thereby
reduce their carbon footprint. The budget impact of such initiative should be properly
factored。
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Carpooling module in SharePoint
RSU/IT
Explore the possibility to reimburse a part Of local transportation pass
042024
MARS/SAC
Development of a teleworking regime that requires less offce space
hot desks,
in line with COM
RSUIHR
rotational schedules)
see under section F below
reg
Green public procurement(6)
ERA to further improve its procurement by implementing green public
procurement. ERA to advance green public procurement by promoting the
use and order of"green offce items" from the EC offce supplies' catalogue。
Calls for procurement tenders ofrelevant goods and services include "Environmental and
social contribution" among the technical evaluation criteria
decommissioned furni-
ture disposal/re-use; recycling policy, donations) whenever it is relevant for the contract。
Tenderers have to comply with these criteria and considerations to qualify for a contract。
It is a standard ERA practice to build environmental considerations into procurement for
relevant goods and services:
Carbon footprint reductionand management of missions;
meetingsand events
ERA will promote and utilise the Commissionsgyidelines gngrganising
sustainable meetings angevents_It has implemented MIPS+ module of
Sysperto replace MiMa and will compile regular reports on travel-related
emissions. ERA encourages environmentally friendlier itineraries in its
travel policy。
ERA adheres
to
Commissions_guidelines
On
Organising
Sustainable
meetings
and
events
77,and commits to promote the guidelines and incentivise to its staff to apply the
steps When organising meetings and events:
Step 0: Is a physical meeting/event necessary?
Step 1: Is the venue sustainable enough?
Step 2: Is the printed and promotional material sustainable?
Step 3: Are the 3Rs applied? (Reduce, Recycle and Reuse)
Step 4: Is the catering sustainable?
Step 5: Are the accommodation and transport environmentally friendly?
European Commission- Green Public Procurement: https:/lec.europa.eulenvironmentle
Jpplindex
en
htm
New release: https:/lec.europa.eulenvironmentlemaslemas_for
news/news84
enhtm
100
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
rolling
(e9:
(eg:
VOUII

Step 6: Have social aspects been considered?
Step 7: Are
sharing environmental awarenessThe Agency could strengthen
the recommendation for internal and external attendees to select train transporta-
tion where convenient connections are available; or air travel options with small-
er carbon footprint
more direct flight routes; less connections). In addition
travel policy and related internal communications will repeatedly emphasise to
ERA staff that online meeting forms should be preferred and picked over travel
intensive face-to-face meetings whenever feasible and expedient。
In 2024, incentives will be made for staff to travel to Innotrans in Berlin bytrain。
Further reduction of paper and stationery consumption
ERA will continue to fully digitise Workflows. It will further reduce the
printouts of publications. In the limited cased of printers' use, ERA will
maintain the use of eco-friendly
partially recycled A4 printing paper as a
default printing medium。
ERA Will advance further digitalisation of the Agency, including the replacement of pa-
per-based processes with electronic workflows and other IT systems
in cooperation with
the Commissions DG DIGIT
suchas:
SYSPER (full rollout)
Microsoft SharePoint and Offce 365: office solutions for paperless document cre-
ation and storing (full rollout)
Ares: document management and archiving system
ERA Will continue to reduce the number of printed (paper-based) publications through
close management ofthe communication & publication plan. ERA Will increase the use of
on demand ofits
publications/materials and web publishing:
ERA Will raise awareness among its Staff to on further possibilities of moving towards pa-
perless office. As part of it instead ofthe usual stationery "welcome package" office sup-
plies will continue to be stored in
designated office and colleagues Will be invited to
collect strictly What
need
on demand。
Waste generation reduction, sorting and recycling
ERA will maintain
orif possible; improve
the selective recyclingand
waste collectionarrangements in its current
building; -
as Wellasinthe
new
building. ERA will order offce supplies and merchandise onanon-
demand basis only; with preference to sustainablelrecycledleco-friendly
distributable merchandise。
ERA will make sure that selective waste collection remains widely available in offices and
common areas ofthe current building and undertakes to provide forthe same in the new
building. In the form of internal communication ERA Will raise awareness among its staff
about these recycling arrangements。
Moreover, ERA has a partner to recycle decommissioned ITequipment。
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Procure and distribute ERA-branded reusable water bottles for staff to reduce
012024
MARS/SAC
disposable CUP Use
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
101
YOU
(e9:
print
they 

Annexes
Reduction of offce space need
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Teleworking rules, including clear criteria for requesting full time presence on premises;
in line with COM
RSUIHR
depending on the service needs
reg
Flexible office arrangement in the new building
in line with new
Discontinue Lille offce rental when the current contract expires
RSU/FM
HQ project
Hot deskarrangements
Use ofavailable green space, greening of the offces
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Designin the new
building: planting native and high CO, conversion capacity plants;
in line with new
installing vertical garden
RSU/FM
HQ project
Propagation of indoor vertical gardens in the new building
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), staff involvementin
environmental issues
List of actions: (78)
Action
Target
Coordinator
Periodical intervention at General Assemblies to inform staff about environmental
 rolling
CAP
topics
Annual CSR activities organised to staff (e.9. tree planting; garbage collection, social
Volunteering
volunteering) and incentivising teams to choose "responsible"team-building activities
rolling
Group
Better
with added environ/social value
Together
Promote events at the level of ERA staff such as: "green week" "green day" or"greener
rolling
MARS/SAC
Office contest
Currentstatus and plan for certifcations and standards
ERA does not hold a certification for any of the environmentlenergy management stand-
ards
EMAS IOI4O0l, HQE IO50001). However; especially in the context ofthe new
building project; ERA pays particular attention to the requirements listed in the respective
standards. The new building is planned to be EMAS & HQE certifed.
「781
Subject to resource constraints
102
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
(e9.

Annex VIl. Building policy
year 2024
Currentbuilding(s)
Table 33
Current building(s)
Surface Area (in m)
Rental contact 
Host 
Building name
Duration
Breakout
Conditions 
country
andtype
Location
Rent (E/
attached to the
(grant or
Offce space
Total
ofthe 
Type
Clause
offce
year) (79)
breakout clause
support)
contract
YIN
(ifapplicable)
120re Marc Lefrancg
(80
year with
ERAHQ
5.250mz
N/A
5.250mz
531613.56E
Offce rental
N/A
n0
59307 Valenciennes FR
tacit renewal
Lille Offce
299 Bouleverd geLeeds
Until
meeting premises
2
Espace
67.00m?
1,50m?
68,50m?
13865.00C
N/A
00
SgooOLlle F
31/12/2026
rental
International
Parking des
Tertiales
SPL
Rue du Fera Cheval 59300
100 parking
year with
26250.00E
parking rental
N/A
几0
Valenciennes
Valenciennes; FR
places
tacit renewal
Stationnement
5318.50m2 +
Total
5317mz
1.50 mz
571728.56E
100 parking
Notes:
1. ERA HQ (Valenciennes): ERA is the only tenant in the ERA HQ building, the Agency exclusively occupies and uses all office and non-office spaces in the building. Therefore,all surface
area is included under the 5.250 m?of office space (SHON , terraces are not considered).
2.Lille Office
Espace International (Lille): ERA shares office spaces with the building landlord (CCI de Region) on the 2nd floor. Following the signature of the addendum n^4 to main
Lease contract that Will enter into force as Of 01/01/2024, the leased total offce space is reduced to 68.50 mz for a lease yearly fee Of 13 865.00 E, where the "quote-part des parties
communes" is 2.049. ERA has an exclusive use Of the "office space" (31) of the 67.OOm considered in the rent; the remaining 2.049 included under "non-offce"
are Shared with the
landlord and othertenants。
HT = hors taxe
(excluding tax), as of 2021.
SHON = Surface Hors Cuvre Nette (Net Surface Areal, see htps;LLwww service-pyblic frlparticulierslyosgroitslF2868.
(81)
The net office space being used exclusively by the Agency namely the reception, cafeteria, meeting rooms, offices, Circulations, storage
technical rooms
COpy corners inside ERA closed space。
(83}
Toilets
sanitary installations, storage
technical rooms and circulations located outside ERA closed space and being shared with other occupants,
including building common areas located
On
the Bround floor main reception (parking places are
not consideredj.
BUILDING POLICY
YEAR 2024
103
Non-

Annexes
Building project inthe planning phase
Due to the growth ofthe Agency, the current building in Valenciennes does not offerany
longer the required conditions to accommodate staff and activities related to the Agen-
Cys role as railways' Authority Therefore; the Agency has re-allocated the majority Of staff
members in double offce spaces as
a short-term Solution. Another short-medium term
solution is the implementation of
teleworking up to the limit set by the Management
Board Decision on Teleworking:
In parallel, as part of a long-term solution, the Agency and Valenciennes Metropole have
started defning the requirements for a new building to accommodate ERA activities after
2028 by means ofa Study composed of different phases. In 2018, the Phase
ofthe Study
confrmed that the current ERA HQ cannot accommodate all requirements related to the
Agency activities and growth。
In 2019 and 2020, the Agency has managed to complete the Phases 2 and 4 ofthe tech-
nicaland functional study resulting in the approval of the technical specifications that will
be used as the base for the selection of architects in the Phase 3 ofthe Study。
Taking into account the experience gained during the pandemic With large-scale tele-
working and new Ways Of working; the building capacity was revised, and the technical
project adapted.
The main objective for the Agency during 2021 was to prepare the technical and fnancial
dossier to be formally addressed to the EU Budgetary Authority for the approval ofthe
New ERA
building project。
In 2022, the Agency clarified with the DG MOVE, the EU Budgetary Authority, the steps
related to the procedure to be followed to have the project formally approved. On the
31/10/2022,
a letter Was sent to the EU Budgetary Authority With the file as part ofthe
Early information procedure under Article 266(2) Of the Financial Regulation resulting in
the presentation on the 17/11/2022 of the ERA project to the Committee on Budgets in
Brussels, where it was noted that the file submitted by ERA was very comprehensive and
Clear。
Following the exchange of views held in the meeting ofthe Committee on Budgets;
some follow-up questions asked by Members during the discussion were sent to ERA.At
this stage; the EU Parliament confrmed that the procedure "Information prealable" can be
considered as closed。
In 2023, Valenciennes Metropole decided to transfer the building project to the "Banque
des Territoires" that Will launch the Call for Architects during 04 2023
012024 with the
purpose to be able to draft a Rental Lease Agreement proposal. This draft Lease Agree-
ment will contain allthe fnancial conditions needed by ERA to launch the formal pro-
cedure (submission ofthe Final Technical and Financial Dossier) aiming at receiving the
approvalofthe Budgetary Authority for the ERA Building Project
ERA is in constant discussion with Valenciennes Metropole for the new building project。
The technical file is ready (Tome fonctionnel Tome technique; Programme Environne-
mentalet 《 Dimensionnement Projet 》) and Valenciennes Metropole will launch a compe-
tition to select an architect. The plan is to launch the competition in Q1 2024 in orderto
select the architectin 03 2024.
Building projects submitted to the European Parliament and the Council
See status under previous section.
104
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

AnnexVII.
Privileges and immunities
The Management Board approved the proposed Headquarters (or Seat) Agreement between the Agency and the host Member State without objections or negative votes in August
2018.
The Seat Agreement between the French Government and the Agency has been presented as draft legislation to the French National Assembly on
July 2021 (84) and has been
adopted and promulgated on 31 January 2022.The fnal text ofthe Seat Agreement can be found here (85). The following table presents the privileges granted to the Agency's staff:
(85
Table 34 - Privileges granted to staff
Privileges granted to staff
Education /
Agency privileges
Protocol of privileges and immunities
diplomatic status
Care 
The HQ Agreement differentiates statutory staff (offcials; TAs, CAs) and external staff
(SNEs, experts, trainees, interims) (Art. 1).
The privileges and immunities provided for the statutory staff aim to guarantee their
independence and the unimpeded functioning of ERA. The Executive Director and the
The Agency's headquarters are located in Valenciennes and Lille. The French authority
statutory Staff (Art. 10):
pledge to provide the necessary support to ensure the location ofthe Agency's
headquarters Will remain unchanged. (Art. 3)
enjoyimmunity from jurisdiction, even after the termination oftheir mission;in
respect ofacts carried out by them in the exercise oftheir functions
The Agency's premises are inviolable; exempt from perquisition, requisition,
are exempt from national taxes on earnings; salaries and respective
supplements
No provision
confscation or expropriation. No French authority can enter the building without
in the
paid by the Agency
the prioragreement ofthe Executive Director. The property and assets ofthe Agency
enjoy the exemption for themselves and their spouses from measures restricting
headquarters
cannot be subject of legal measure of constraint without the authorisation of the CJEU.
immigration and from aliens' registration formalities;
agreement。
(Art. 4)
enjoythe same privileges in respect Of currency and exchange regulations
Please refer
to AnnexV
The Agency's archives and all official documents are also inviolable. The Agency will
comparably to those accorded to staff of international organisations
beneft from the same treatment the French Government provides to diplomatic
enjoy the right to import duty-free their furniture and personal effects at the time of
E. Schooling
for further
missions when it comes to offcial communication. No restriction can be placed on
frst taking up their post in France and the right on the termination of their functions
information on
neither official communication addressed to the Agency ora member of its personnel
in France to export free of
their furniture and personal effects, subject in both
noron any communication emanating from the Agency. In addition, the Agency shall
cases to conditions considered necessary by the French authorities
education.
have the right to use codes and to dispatch and receive offcial correspondence and
Enjoythe right to import duty-free their private car acquired whetherin the country
other official communications by courier orin sealed bags which shall be subject to
oftheir last residence orin the country of which they are nationals; bound by the
the same privileges and immunities as diplomatic couriers and
(Art. 5)
Single market rules. They also enjoy the right to export it duty-free; subject tothe
conditions considered necessary by the French authorities;
Have access
along with their family members
to access without discrimination
compared with French citizens toall public services provided on French territory
including medical services, education, childcare; and housing:
https:LIwww era europa.eu/sitesldefaultlfileslagencyldocs/decisionldecision_n180_headquarters_agreement
between_agency
a10
host
Sate
en
pdf
Assemblee Nationale
https:Jwww assemblee-nationale frdyn/l5/textes/l1564323
projet-loi
Senat
https:
WWWSenatfrdossier
Tslll2233h
https:
WWW assemblee-nationale fr/dyn/l5/textes/l1564323
accord-internanonalpdf
http:IWww senat frTrap/21-365/121-3651.html
PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
105
day
duty -
bags:.

Annexes
The French Government will deliver to all members ofthe Agencys personnel (expect
those Who have the French nationality or permanent residency) a special residency
document identifying them as member ofthe Agency's personnel The Agency will
The Agency is entitled to display the flag ofthe EU,as wellas its own on its premises
ensure that once an
employee leaves the Agency, its residency document is handed
and Vehicles (Art. 6)
back to the Ministry Of Foreign Affairs. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs also facilitates
The Agency, its assets, income and other properties;, shall be exempt from all direct
the issuance of those residency documents and work authorisations to the family
taxes. The Agencyis also exempt from indirect taxes and duties included the price
members ofall the Agencys personnel, expect those Who have the French nationality
of movable and immovable property and services, acquired for its official use and
or permanent residency (Art. 11 (1,2).
involving an expenditure of at least E1 50. The exemption may be granted by way ofa
The French authorities will take all necessary measures to facilitate the entry stay, and
refund. The Agency shall also be exempt from all custom duties and any other taxes for
departure of experts in missions for the Agency on the French territory. Necessary visa
all goods intended for official use; as long as this exoneration is foreseen in the EUor
sand authorisations Will be delivered for free as quickly as possible (Art. 11 (2,4)).
national legislation. (Art. 7-8)
In addition, the Executive Director and the statutory staff are exempt from any
Finally; the Agency is entitled to registerthree vehicles with diplomatic plates. (Art. 9)
compulsory national social security system. External staff; SNEs, and their family
members, subject to their coverage in their own country of citizenship, are also exempt
from any compulsory national social security System. (Art. 12)
106
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Annex IX. Evaluations
The Agency has a system in place to monitor its performance and formalise an evaluation
ofthe results achieved in the year into the SPD dashboard, as an ongoing tool, as well
as
through the Consolidated Annual Activity Report; Which focuses on the achieve-
ments ofindicators and targets set out in the SPD.
The following instruments are used for collecting the data and for triggering actions:
Work progress reports, filled in by projects and service managers reporting the
status Of projects and services against the relevant plans; budget and human re-
sources allocation, including SPD targets:
Budget execution monitoring, a continuous activity based on a daily automat-
ed report fed with SUMMA data, displaying the level of appropriations, commit-
ments and payments to date foreach budget line and for each projectlservice
Monthly management monitoring reports, analysing and reviewing pro-
ject and staff allocation (actuals Vs planned), budget execution and risksl
issues at projectlservice level
Monthly budget review meetings with the Management Team to analyse the
data from the budget execution monitoring and take timely decisions for deploy-
ing
redeploying the resources. The redeployment of resources is brought to the
attention ofthe Management Board for information ifthe transfers are within one
title or between titles but below the 109 threshold or for decision ifthe transfers
are between titles and above the 109 threshold。
IMCS, part of the internal monitoring programme aimed at verifying that pro-
cesses, projects, services and products comply with internal and external require-
ments; including:
IASaudits
ECAaudits
Non-Conformity register; Where deviations from the relevant rules and provi-
sions are recorded
AIlthe sources listed above allow the Agency governance bodies; namely the Manage-
ment Team and the Management Board to monitor continuously the functioning of the
Agency.In order to allow this, the Agency has developed
performance dashboard
Which is turning the data into meaningful information.
The dashboard provides figures, charts and visuals about:
Human resources (incl. information on statutory staff members; geographical and
gender balance)
Budget management (Revenues and Expenditure; with
a breakdown to
budget
titles of budget envelope/appropriation and paid amounts to date)
Authority tasks (incl. the number of SSCNAITA applications received, number au-
thorisations/certifcations issued to date; planned and actual hours per authorisa-
tion type)
Projects and services (incl. Budget and FTE planned Vs. actual, status traffic lights
With information on red status, overall cost analysis)
Strengthening Action Plan (SAP) (recruitment status; SAP policy priorities; SAP
milestones;, budget execution)
Audits (status on open recommendations)
EVALUATIONS
107

Annexes
Terminology
87
The following terms are used in the SPD -
in accordance with the Commission guideline
onevaluation:
Strategic Statement (88) is a coherent area Of action With objectives and resources. It is
the basic building block for the structure ofthe annual Work Programme; distinguishing
between operational activities
directly related to the mission and core tasks ofthe agen-
CY, and horizontall cross-cutting activities
carried out to support
operational activities
and staff
Objective describes What the agency wants to achieve either in the short or long term.
Indicator is
a characteristic or attribute that is measured regularly in order to assess to
what extent an objective has been met。
Baseline is the point of reference against which achievement or progress towards objec-
tives is measured
Milestone is an intermediate target set; expressed in quantitative or qualitative terms;
measuring progress towards the achievement of long-term objectives。
Target is the ultimate desired situation, quantifed and timed.
Inputs are the human and fnancial resources used and the time
required to produce
OutPUts
Actions are the Work carried out over a certain
period oftime; consuming resources and
producing outputs in accordance with the objectives set.
Outputs are What is directly produced or
supplied through the agency intervention. They
often relate to the expected deliverables of the intervention and are identifed based on
its operational objectives。
Qutcome is the envisaged medium to long term effects of a programme or policy out-
put. While its results are not easily foreseeable and might not be entirely in the sphere of
control of the Agency the outcome represents an intermediate medium-term step be-
tween the agency' outputs and longer-term societal impacts. The Agency has structured
its multiannual work programme according to desired outcomes to ensure allof its out-
puts will contribute positively to its Vision & ambition。
Results are the direct effects of intervention(s) on the target groups。
Impacts are the indirect or long-term effects ofan intervention on the EU or global socie-
ty that are; at least partly, expected to be influenced by agency's interventions。
Communication C(2020)2297 fnalof 20.4.2020 on the strengthening of the governance of Union Bodies under
Arfcle 70 ofthe Financial Regulation 2018/1046 and on the guidelines for the SPD and the CAAR, C. Terminology
Referred to as 'Activity" in former SPDs
108
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Annex X. Strategy for
the organisational
managementand
internal control
systems
The strategy gives an overview on how the internal control system is organised and is
contributing to the mitigation of the risks to the achievement of Agency's objectives to
acceptable levels。
The Agency is operating based on a management system designed to provide reasona-
ble assurance regarding the achievement ofthe five internal control objectives derived
from the Agency's Financial regulation as wellas ensuring continuous improvement and
the need to implement a flexible and effective governance. The management system is
implemented through four high-level components
Strategic, (ii) Core; (ii) Supportand
(iv) Measurement and improvement. Each component is including all 17 principles ofthe
Internal Control Framework (ICF). There is also a clear link with the internal components of
the ICF (i.e. control environment risk assessment; control activities and monitoring). This
system is deployed further at the levelof processes。
The roles and responsibilities for implementing the system are integrated as follows:
The Management Board represents the Member States, and the institutional stakehold-
ers has
strategic role on budgetary and planning matters: It is overseeing the internal
controls and risk management ofthe Agency. It ensures that the Agency fulfils its mission
and performs the tasks assigned to it
The Executive Director (ED) in its capacity Of Authorising Officer (AO) and under the SU-
pervision of the Management Board is ultimately responsible for the management ofthe
internal control framework. The ED sets the tone at the tope and puts in place structures
and processes to gain reasonable assurance that the system is operating effectively。
The heads of unitsldepartment in their capacity OfIAuthorising offcer by delegation
(AOD) must ensure that the internal controls are efficient and effective in their area ofre-
sponsibility as per AO delegation of powers. Both AO and AOD in their capacity Of process
owners are responsible for continuous improvement ofthe processes
The newly created function of manager in charge of Risk managementand internal
control is fulfilled by a middle manager. It oversees the monitoring the implementation
ofthe internal control arrangements and for complete and accurate reporting on the Op-
eration and effectiveness of the internal control framework. This function is also in charge
of facilitating the risk management process。
The accounting offcer certifes the year-end accounts thus providing reasonable assur-
ance thatthe accounts present a true and fair view ofthe fnancial situation ofthe Agency。
AIlstaff should ensure at their own level of competency that their activities comply with
rules and regulations and report any deficiency。
The delegations of powers for executing the budget are detailed in internal procedures:
The implementation of the budget is done via projects and services Which is reflected in
STRATEGY FORTHE ORGANISATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
109

Annexes
empowering project and service managers in managing the associated risks and resourc-
es without
prejudice to the AOIAOD powers。
The IAS is the internal auditor of the Agency and performs independent assessment on
the internal control systems based on a three-year plan. Complementary; internal audits
are
performed. The external audit is performed by the European Court of Auditors (for the
legality and regularity oftransactions) and an external company (for the accounts).
Internal controls tools include:
Controls performed atall levels of the Agency
Risk management; in particular at project/service level and Agency level where
the most
signifcantlrelevant risks are captured including strategic risks (recorded
in the agency/corporate risk register and reported in the CAAR). Risks are formally
assessed at both inherent and residual level to make sure that the analysis ofthe
effectiveness ofthe controls in place is ensured before additional mitigating meas-
ures are put in place (cost-effectiveness of controls).
Corrective/preventive measures are established when recurrent and systemic er
rors are recorded. Ex-ante nonconformities involving signifcant amount of money
(>15.000 euros) are approved by the AO
Internal control monitoring criteria for measuring the presence and the function-
ing ofthe principles are in process of being developed considering the risk envi-
ronment and are focused more on effectiveness and effciency。
Follow-up ofrecommendations from ECA, IAS, Discharge authority as wellas other
sources (e.9.external evaluations) to ensure that the actions plans are effectively
implemented within the agreed deadlines:
An integrated reporting system to inform and alert management on the progress
on the implementation of costs for each projectlservice as Well as SPD outputs
(monthly dashboard). The cost data is connected to the source (SUMMA).It in-
cludes several other parameters such as risks, issues, changes corrective actions
taken; quality, milestones etc.
Budgetary status reports are produced on
daily basis including an overview
per unit of the budget execution per budget line for all fund sources, financial
information on commitments, payments and transfers, information on progress of
planned procurement and contracts. The information helps achieving the perfor-
mance targets in these particular areas。
Ex-ante controls consisting in several checks of fnancial and operational aspects
oftransactions by the actors involved in the fnancial circuits. There is a
Com-
prehensive checklistltemplates as wellas guidance which ensure an effective level
Of control. The specific controls are detailed in the manual of fnancial procedures
Which also included the steps to be taken for making a fnancial transaction, the
Various fnancial circuits by type oftransaction and the different roles and responsi-
bilities. The Agency is putting substantial efforts in updated these manuals/check-
Jists。
Sensitive function policy defnes the management offunctions involving a consid-
erable amount of autonomy and executive powers with the aim of ensuring that
actions are taken to mitigate the risk that the jobholders deliberately misuse their
decision-making powers or influence With a view to gaining personal advantages
Ad-hoc controls are additionally applied at the level of processes whenever the
management assesses it is necessary to mitigate a
specific risk (e.9. selection pro-
cedures; financial delegations):
The Agency's anti-fraud strategy has been developed in accordance with OLAF guidelines;
i is setting clear objectives, actions and responsibilities and it is based on
standalone
fraud riskassessment exercise adapted to the Agency's environment encompassing fraud
110
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Very

risks regardless of their criticality. The risk Of fraud is duly considered when carry out the
riskassessment exercise
The strategy is focusing on three objectives:
Handle effectively actual or perceived conflict ofinterest
Enhance the promotion Of high ethical values as well as increasing fraud aware-
DeSS
Enhance data and information security
The objectives are fully aligned with the fraud risks identifed which include inherent sig-
nificant risk Of conflict of interest due to specifc circumstances of the Agency's activities
(i.e.regulatory powers With signifcant decision making powers and potential reputational,
legaland fnancial consequences if conflict ofinterest not adequately managed; relatively
limited 'market' for recruitment of staff as wellas for entities Which could provide services
forthe Agency), potential risk of cyber-attacks leading to operational damage, loss ofdata。
unauthorised disclosure of information or breach of data; potential risk of outsourcing the
data and information security without proper security risk assessment); risk of staffmem-
bers not being fully aware Of their ethics obligations as well
as
handling and reporting
fraud. The Agency has put in place comprehensive control measures proportional to the
levelof risks and amount of risk identified which encompass (but not limited to) manda-
tory tailor-made trainings on ethics and separately on antifraud for all staff mandatory
submission of declaration ofinterests forall staffand members ofthe Management Board
and ofthe Board of Appeal, ex-postlon the spot controls; review of internal procedures
(including procedures for reporting and handling fraud). Control indicators enable assess-
ment ofeffectiveness of the measures taken_
Starting 2023, the Agency is implementing the following activities under a single
service (Internal Management and Control System
ERA1158) to better supportthe
assurance function:
1.The internal management system coordination
coordinating the proper imple-
mentation ofthe internal control framework
2.The central fnancial verifcation;
3. The contact point for IAS, ECAand EP discharge follow-up.
Assessment of the effectiveness of the management system
The agency monitors continuously the efficiency and effectiveness ofthe Internal Control
Framework。
yearly assessment report is produced where consideration is given to the
results Of controls mentioned above:
Allthe internal control components and principles
must be present and functioning wellat all levels of the Agency to be considered effec-
tive. The results ofthe assessment are reported in the CAAR.
STRATEGY FORTHE ORGANISATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
111

Annexes
Annex XI. Plan for grant, contribution, Or service-
levelagreements
Table 35 - Grant contributions, or service-level agreements
General information 
Financialand HRimpacts
Date of 
Camount
Duration
Counterpart 
Short description
2023
2024
2025
2026
signature
(EUR)
Grant Agreements_
48 months
Continuation of pre-accession support tO
Amount (EUR)
1.IPA (2019/410-
04/12/2019
450,000
01/01/2020
DG NEAR
the EU candidates and potential candidates
Ne OfCAs
319)
31/12/2023
Western Balkans and Turkey)
Ne Of SNEs
2. EUMedRail
84 months
Implementation ofthe action EUMedRail
Amount (EUR)
(ENI/2016/359
31/12/2016
2,000000
01/01/2017
DG NEAR
EuroMed Rail Safety and Interoperability
Ne of CAs
727)
31/12/2023
Project
Ne of SNEs
Amount (EUR)
Total Grant Agreements
Noof CAs
Ne of SNEs
Contribution Agreements
System Pillar
45 months
Amount (EUR)
225,410
205,550
Dm
Dm
Provide a fnancial contribution to fnance the
(MOVE/C4/
15/07/2021
750,000
16/07/2021
DG MOVE SRD.3
implementation ofthe action ERA support to
Ne of CAs
1.5
pm.
SUB/2021-454/
01/05/2025
the Railway System Pillar
Ne Of SNEs
512.852702)
2.Technical
Amount (EUR)
250,000
support onthe
Ne Of CAs
deployment of
Technical support on the deployment ofthe
the European
TBD (91)
250,000
2023 (3 months)
DG REFORM
European Rail Traffc Management System in
Rail Traffc
Greece
Ne Of SNEs
Management
System in Greece
Extension of the grant agreement to 2023 under negotiation。
Full amount received by the end of 2022. However; due to the project extension to 31/12/2023 the remaining E 192,464 will be spentin 2023.
(91}
The details will be added as soon as the signature will have taken place
112
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

General information
Financialand HRimpacts
Date of
Samount 
Duration
Counterpart
Short description
2023
2024
2025
2026
Signature
(EUR)
3. Pilot project
Support the generation of knowledge
Amount (EUR)
395,250
395,250
Single European
and invaluable lessons with the goalof
Ne of CAs
Railway
26 months
accelerating the
Prototype
16/10/2023
790,500
16/10/2023-
DGMOVE
completion ofthe Single European Railway
Corridor Munich-
14/12/2025
Area, in particular for the Rhine Alpine rail
Ne Of SNEs
Verona (MOVE/
corridor between
C2/5UB/2022-
499/512.903563)
Munichand Verona
Amount (EUR)
475,410
600,800
395,250
Dm.
Total Contribution Agreements
Ne of CAs
1.5
Dm.
Ne Of SNEs
Service Level Agreements
Amount (EUR)
1.N/A
Ne of CAs
Ne of SNEs
Amount (EUR)
Total Service-Level Agreements
Ne of CAs
Ne of SNEs
Amount (EUR)
475,410
600,800
395,250
pm。
Total
Ne OfCAs
pm
pm。
Ne of SNEs
PLAN FOR GRANT, CONTRIBUTION, OR SERVICE-LEVEL AGREEMENTS
113
Area

Annexes
Annex XII. Strategy
for cooperation with
third countries and/
Orinternational
Organisations
Since the adoption Of the existing strategy for global cooperation (together with SPD
2018), the Agency is updating the scope of work in order to best address the priorities
listed by the European Commission in this feld, namely:
The EUtransport policy aims at promoting greater development and stability in the neighbour-
ing countries, enhancing connectivity with the neighbouring areas and towards Asia,and cre-
ating a level-playing feld for international rail transportand the rail supply industry beyond EU
borders. The Commission welcomes Agencys aspirations to provide technical supportat Com-
mission request The Commission reminds that the main priorities as regards rail international
cooperation fall into EUs neighbourhood, strategic partners and high growth economies be-
neighbourhood,and international organisations. Agencys international activities should
notgo beyond:
114
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
yond

Annex XIIl. Procurement plan
Table 36
New procurement procedures to be launchedin 2024
Title
Description
Schedule
Market ceiling
Type of Contract
in line with SAPallofthe
Agency's processes Will need to be
Process leaning services
leaned for which the support ofa company is needed in line
0
156,000.00f
Direct contract
with the endorsement ofthe MB.
As system authority for ERTMS, ERA in past years gathered
the global ERTMS community in its hometown Valenciennes
to discuss the way forward. Held on bi-annual basis
ERTMS Conference
in alternation with the European Rail
Safety Days; the
220,000.00E
Direct contract
conference usually features keynote presentations and
workshop elements overa
two-days period. Traditionally it
made EU decision-makers fnd their way to Valenciennes
Linked Data Conference (June 2024,
Digitalisation becoming increasingly important; the Agencyis
02
250,000.00E
Direct contract
Italy)
planning its frst Linked Data conference in June 2024:
Wherever fnancially feasible; the ERA team seeks to
address topics of strategic importance with the respective
Connecting Europe Days (April 2024,
Presidency ofthe Council of the European Union. For the
25,000.00E
Direct contract
Brussels, Belgium Presidency)
Belgium Presidency 2024,the Connecting Europe Days are
an excellent opportunity to address railway connectivity and
interoperability themes:
Since 2008, ERA has been present at the largest railway
industry fair worldwide InnoTrans; Which is held every two
years in Berlin. It was used as platform to present ERAs
key activities that impact the rail sectorin its new role as
European authority with one-to-one meetings between
Innotrans
(Sept. 2024, Berlin)
100,000.00E
Direct contract
ERA staff and members ofthe rail sector: In 2024, the EU
institutions
ERA together with the European Commission
and Europes Rail Joint Undertaking (EU-RAIL)
Willattend
InnoTrans for the frst time jointly using a common "EU village
stand
This annual conference;
12th edition, co-organised by ERA
Budapest Conference (Sept 2024,
and the Department of Railway Authority ofthe Hungarian
03
25,000.00E
Direct contract
Hungarian Presidency)
Ministry of Construction and Transport; Will be underthe
Hungarian EU Presidencyin 2024.
PROCUREMENT PLAN
115

Annexes
Title 
Description
Schedule
Market ceiling
Type of Contract
The ERA Human and Organisational Factors (HOF) Biennial
Conference has become a house number for the positive
railway Safety culture community in Europe. Addressing
HOF Biennial Conference (Dec 2024,
topics such as HOF and railway automation, or managing
30,000.00f
Direct contract
Valenciennes)
Workload and fatigue; it is an important catalyst for
discussions and reflection on
topics and brings together
the railway community to promote a positive safety culture in
the EUand beyond.
Procurement of IT tool to facilitate storage and use of
Procurement of IT tool for confdential
confdential data linked to standard inputs for economic
50,000.O0E
Direct contract
storage of data for economic analyses
analyses linked to launched Economic Steering Group Task
Force
ESISDID FWC is aimed to provide off-site services for
ESISDID
External Services for
conducting Analysis, Design, Development; Maintenance and
Studies related to Information Systems on the Interoperable
Information Systems Development
01
4000,0O0O0E
Framework Contract
Data area of activity, including specifcally those based on
On
Interoperable Data
semantic technologies; such as Linked Data, Knowledge
Graphs and Semantic Web。
Contracted technical in the feld of telematics (TAP and TAF)
Domain technical support
to support the evolution ofthe telematics area to a semantic
01
240,250.00E
Direct contract
Telematics)
approach and alignment with the Register of Infrastructure
(RINF)
Contracted technical support on the development a
digital Driver Route Book including identifcation of data
Domain technical support (Digital
requirements for the provision ofnecessary information for
240,250.00f
Direct contract
Route book)
the driverand technical advice on the data presentation of
the elements for the driver
Theaim of the tender is to establish a contract for the Update
ofthe Generic ETCS Drivers Handbook on the Use ofthe
Generic ETCS Drivers Handbook
onboard equipment of ERTMS/ETCS (European Rail Traffc
130,000.00f
Direct contract
update
Management System
European Train Control System)
in accordance With the Control Command and Signalling
Technical Specification for Interoperability (CCS TSI)
ERA safety leadership training was developed in 2018 and has
been successfully deployed. Critical factor is the professional
Professional flm for a Safety
flm that shapes the course:
follow-up training is to be
01
160000.00E
Direct contract
leadership training
developed. The possible successful tenderer will produce the
flm that will support this new training:
116
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
key

Table 37
Planned usein 2024 of existing framework contracts
To be committedin
FRAMEWORK CONTRACTS
2024 (estimated) 
Local Identifer
User Reference
Expiry Date
ERA 202205 FWC-OI
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO ERTMS TRACKSIDE APPROVAL
21/05/2027
34500 EUR
ERA 202301 FWC-01
INTERPRETATION SERVICES
24/07/2027
207500 EUR
ERA 202107 FWC
Catering services
Valenciennes)
08/12/2025
30 000 EUR
PMO contract
AMEX GLOBAL BUSINESS
Travel Agency services (missions)
31/03/2024
100,000.00f
TRAVEL
SCIC/C1/2018/FWC/02
SCIC EVENT MANAGEMENT SERVICES
LOT
23/01/2024
360000 EUR
OC_EFSA_COM_2019_
01 LOT 2-01
DEVELOPMENTOF STATIC AND INTERACTIVE INFORMATION AND STORYTELLING PRODUCTS
22/06/2024
72 0O0 EUR
OC_EFSA_COM_2019_01 LOT 1-01
DEVELOPMENTOF INTEGRATED COMMUNICATION CAMPAIGNS
10/05/2024
90 00O EUR
ESMA 202202
ESMA ICT Consultancy
8/10/2026
250 000 EUR
ERA 201906 FWC
ESP-EISDG
Off site IT services
28/07/2024
000 OOO EUR
ERA 2021 02 FWC
Consultancy support on Vehicle Authorisations applications
06/01/2026
350000 EUR
ERA 202203 FWC
DEVELOPMENTOF TRAINING PRODUCTS FOR THE EU AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS KNOWLEDGE HUB
31/08/2026
85 00O EUR
SLADIGIT 028
Service Level Agreement with DG DIGIT
No end date
250,000.00f
PROCUREMENT PLAN
117

Annexes
Annex XIV.
Strengthening Action
Plan (SAP) 2023-2027
1.Context
In 2022, the Agencys Management Board adopted the Strengthening Plan prepared by
the Agency in close cooperation with the European Commission. The purpose of the
Strengthening Plan is to make the strongest possible case in order to strengthen the
Agency with resources matching the level ofambition necessary for achieving the
important EC policy objectives for rail, in an effective and effcient manner and
beneft from high levels of ambition and effciency within ERAs structure and
methods.
With the document serving as a basis for the internal EC budget negotiations in 2022, the
Agency received
proposed increase of 12 TAs in 2022 (92). While the additional TA allo-
cation is lower compared to the request from the
Strengthening Plan (12 TAs proposed
out ofthe 22 TAs requested), it can offer a good basis for the Agency to proceed with the
implementation ofthe Strengthening Plan。
very important challenge is represented by the fact that the additional TA allocation
needs to be fully covered under the existing subsidy envelope. To make best use of this
TAallocation and considering the external constraints related to the indexation of salaries
and prices; the Agency is making a thorough assessment of its capacity to cover these
costs in a sustainable manner until the end ofMFF 2021-2027. Several measures are envis-
aged, suchas the time-phased hiring ofthe TAs. The budget constraint on the subsidy side
is therefore an element to be properly monitored and managed for the Whole remaining
period ofthe current MFE
The current document describes the plan of actions which the Agency will put in place in
the period 2023-2027 in order to implement the Strengthening Plan, taking into consid-
eration the level of additional staff allocation proposed by the EC. It is hereinafter referred
as SAP
(Strengthening Action Plan) 2023-2027.This builds on actions already taken up to
present to increase the efficiency of the support services and tools。
2. What We Wantto achieve
ERA has established an outcome-driven framework, placing strong emphasis on effec-
tiveness (i.e. "doing the right things"), in line with the prioritisation of activities included in
the Strengthening Plan. In parallel, a delivery structure based on Projects and Services has
been established. Outputs of projects and services are followed up and measured using a
dashboard approach。
With the Strengthening Plan; We will implement
a Series of improvement actions that
should enable to achieve the most appropriate outcomes with the resources available:
This is important not only to justify the additional resources requested by the Agency; but
alsoin orderto demonstrate that European taxpayer's money is used in the most effective
Way, So that the European railway system can develop towards attractiveness, efficiency
and sustainability。
6 TAs are expected to be phased out by the end of MFF 2021-2027
118
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

Improvement actions Will be assessed according to their impact as wellas ease of imple-
mentation . Quantitative targets are defned (mainly related to the respective FTEs) and fol-
lowed up/measured on a regular basis. The baseline is ERA SPD 2022 and the monitoring
tools are ERA SPD Portfolio Management together With the SPD Dashboard developed
already。
3. Objectives, actions, indicators, and targets
The SAP 2023-2027 mirrors the Strengthening Plan and translated it into concrete actions。
Itis based on the planning and monitoring frameworkand enablers already setup
bythe Agency, Which includes:
the multi-annual planning in the SPD, with a clear focus on the intervention logic;
the Agency's performance dashboard, including reporting to the EB and the MB
the regular budget execution monitoring and reporting
the Consolidated Annual Activity Report。
The annual work programmes will therefore be aligned to the priorities listed in the SAP
which represents an anchor forthe multi-annual planning in what the priority policy areas
are concerned。
A direct
tracking Of SAP-related FTEs, outputs and targets Will be includes
in the SPDs。
The SAP 2023-2027is
organised along the following componentslobjectives:
Drive an optimal resourcing of policy priority areas, matched by proportional out-
puts and outcomes;
including efficiency
b.) Maintain proper resourcing and further efficiency gains for the authority tasks
C)
Ensure a reduction in the Agency's administrative FTE allocation while maintaining
regularity and legality
d.)
Ensure the overall projected FTE evolution by 2027
Ensure effective and effcient budget management (planning and execution).ap-
propriate risk management
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
119
gains

Annexes
A
Ensure an optimal resourcing of policy priority areas, matched by proportional outputs and outcomes, including effciency gains
Note: In addition to the balanced inputloutput ratio for the priority areas; efficiency gains are also embedded and measured with the same indicators: The latter represent the delivery of relatively
more (ambitious) outputs for the same amount of effort compared to previous years。
2022
Target
Action
Indicator
PIS code
baseline 
2023 (93)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A1.1. No.of FTEs allocated
001MRA1116
4.62
4.93
(annual Values)
A1.2.No.of NSA audits
performed peryear
Report after 2
Cycles issued with
A1.3. Proper learning from the
Follow-up of
Follow-Upof
Optimised scope
Optimised scope
recommendations
NSA monitoring
deficiencies ensured
defciencies ensured
implemented
implemented
foranew MB
decision
A1.4 Audit at the Member
Referential to be
State level, ie. covering more
started at the end
Al. Ensure proper
than just the NSA Activities in
ofthe 2nd NSA
input/output for NSA
the MS
Monitoring
monitoring
A1.5 Observation OfNSA
To be includedin
To be includedin
To be includedin
To be includedin
supervision activities of RUs
Pilot during the 2nd
the NSA monitoring
the NSA monitoring
the NSA
monitoring
the NSA monitoring
wherethe Agency has issued
yearofthe 2nd cycle
service; when
service; when
Service; when
Service; when
the SC
relevant
relevant
relevant
relevant
A1.6 "Monitor" NSAsin EU
To be started atthe
accession countries (synergies
ERA.1151
endofthe 2nd NSA
With IPA
and TCT) after
IPA countries accession"
Monitoring
A1.7 Combine large scope
To be started at the
NSA monitoring audits and
endofthe 2nd NSA
more targeted audits
monitoring
process audits)
For 2023 We Work with the assumption that all 12 additional TAs are distributed across the priority areas; however
correction factor (0.5) needs to be applied to the additional TA Work capacity hired in 2023 (in terms of FTE), which corresponds
to the late
during the year. The numbers included in the 2023 column are already calculated with this correction factor。
This indicator captures the speed of progress with organising the NSA audits;
complementing indicator is included in the SPD to measure the number of reports issued.
This could probably be done less frequently i.e.
longer audit cycle: G-year cycle, oreven longer ortargeted only to MSs where we encountered severe issues during the NSA monitoring which could not be addressed at the NSA level but rather
at the Member State level。
Not to replace the NSAs supervision, but to assess the performance of NSAs while carrying out supervision activities (e.8. follow up type 3 issues by concerned NSAs)
Subject to the extension of the IPA grantin 2023
120
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
Cycle
grant
Cycle
(e9.
Cycle
hiring

2022
Target
Action
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
2023 (93)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A2.1 . No.of FTEs allocated
OOOMRA1138
4.01
(annual values)
A2.2.No.of NoBo audits
performed peryear (full
8-9
15
15
20
20
20
monitoring cycle in 3 years
20 NoBos/year)
981
42.3. Learning from NoBo
Organised whenthe
monitoring/ Forum of best
audit Cycle is at
A2.Ensure proper
practices
an advanced stage
input/output for
A2.4
new Common
NoBo monitoring
framework for NoBos, DeBos
Final draft agreed
and AsBo assessment and
with ECas a basis for
First concept drafted
monitoring set up by the
future legislative
Agency (new legal base may
proposal
be needed)
A2.5 "Knowledge hub"to
To be started at the
promote best practices and
end ofthe
NoBo
train NoBos
(widening it to EU
audit
accession countries)
This indicator measures the speed Of progress with organising the NoBo audits; a complementing indicator is included in the
to measure the number of reports issued。
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
121
Cycle:
SPD

Annexes
2022
Target
Action
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
2023 (93)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A3.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA1218
10.35
11.22
13
13
13
13
(annual values)
ERA-REC-129
A3.2. Expertise provided to
ECin the standardisation
Work related to FRMCS, ATO
Provision by 2025
innovation (satellite-based
in TSIifinputis
system for train positioning;
provided via System
enhanced onboard
Pillar
signaling etc )- integration of
enhancements in CCSTSI
A3. Ensure proper
input/output for the
A3.3.Support forthe
ERTMSand radio
EU-wide deployment of
Requests OfCINEA-
Requests Of CINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
communication
ERTMS, including economic
DG Move 10096
DG Move 10096
DG Move 1009
DG 1009 Move
DG 1009 Move
eVolution
impact analysis to inform
assessed
assessed
assessed
assessed
assessed
possible public investment
prioritisation (e g. by CINEA)
A3.4 CCS TSI Maintenance
Publication OfCCS
Update CCS TSI with
Update CCS TSI with
and operational activities for
TSI Application
error corrections
error corrections
CCS Framework
CCSTSI Article 12
analysis delivered
roadmap
roadmap
A3.5 review Of ESC/RSCand
ESC/RSC roadmap
according to the
implemented as
implemented as
roadmap for reduction
proposal
deadline setin art。
planned
planned
12 CCSTSI
122
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
guide

2022
Target
Action
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
2023 (93)
2024
2025
2026
2027
ERA.1175
A4.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1177
4.5
5.94
(annual Values)
ERA.1178
ERA.1172
Harmonised
A4.2.Lessons Learned
CCM process
implemented in CCM process
implemented
Implementation
Provisions in TSI by
A4.3.CRDAC
proposal
2025
A.4.4.CR Unique
Specifc Cases for
Unique
Authorisation for
Authorisation
Coaches
Vehicles
AlInew EN referred
A.4.5.CR Standards
TO EN updates
TO EN updates
TOEN updates
TO EN updates
toin TSIanalysed
A.4.6.CR Virtual Specifcation
Closed
A4.Ensure proper
A.4.7.CRTSIINF Cleaned-UP
Draft
Final Draft
input/output for the
A.4.8.CR Battery/Hydrogen
Closed
TSIs related Work
tralns
A.4.9.CR Structural composite
Closed
materials
A.4.10.CR Platform/Train
Closed
interface
A.4.11 CR Noise of parked
Closed
trains
44.12.
Energy measurements _
Closed
A.4.13.CR RIV/Dangerous
Closed
goods
A.4.14 CCM ready for
CCMready by end
CCM implemented
CCMimplemented
CCMimplemented
CCM implemented
processing System Pillar input
0f02
forall requests
forall requests
forallrequests
forall requests
A4.15. Ecrequests for EN
Provided
Provided
Provided
Provided
standards
International
International
A.4.16 TSIs as global standards
Strategy
1st Draft
Strategy。
Final
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
123

Annexes
2022
Target
Action
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
2023 (93)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A.4.17. Support to EC (TO/
Advice/Derogations/ NoBos)
1009
1009
10096
10096
10096
within agreed deadlines
A.4.18.Increased
A4.Ensure proper
New structure/
Phased
Phased
Phased
Phased
harmonisation of operations
input/output for the
approach defned/
implementation of
implementation of
implementation of
implementation of
define new structure forTSI
TSIs related Work
agreed
new structure
new structure
new structure
new structure
OPE
A4.19 CRon Rear-end signal
Closed
A4.20 TSI Dissemination
Workshops
A5.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1172
4.28
7.36
78
7.8
7.8
78
(annual Values)
ERA-PRG-006
A5.2.NRs to include in TSIs
CRs introduced
339 CRs Closed
669 CRs Closed
1009 CRs Closed
A5.3. Increased performance
A5. Ensure proper
ofand trustin MS as control
Project fnalised
1009 of planned
10096of planned
1009of planned
1009ofplanned
input/output for
level
Manage NSRs cleaning-
(through agreement
MS assessed (incl。
MS assessed (incl:
MS assessed (incl。
MS assessed (incl.
the clean-up of
UP process 2.0 (compliance
with MS and/orthe
impact of earlierTO
impact of earlierTO
impact of earlier TO
impact ofearlier TO
national rules (99)
with TSIOPE 2023,incl.
issuing OfTO)
irelevant)
irelevant)
ifrelevant)
ifrelevant)
impact OfTO, ifrelevant)
A5.4.Increased performance
Draft new regulation
OfSMS
draft new regulation
Develop guidance/
Draft new regulation
and develop
Delivertraining
Delivertraining
for harmonisation ofType 5
training
NSR
guidancel training
In 2023, the Agency and the EC are putting together a practical implementation plan to address the acknowledged need for harmonisation in assessing and cleaning all the categories of rules (vehicle, Fl , safety /operationall . Once agreed, the
milestones ofthis plan will be reflected in an update of the indicators for SAP 2023-2027 and SPD 2024, respectively。
124
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026

2022
Target
Action
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
2023 (93)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A6.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1219
3.5
4.18
5.5
5.5
55
5.5
(annual values)
Implementation
A6.2. Management ofthe
GOA meetings
ofGoA workplan
GoA implemented
GoAimplemented
GOA
implemented
Group of Analysts (GOA)
chaired
during CSM ASLP
phase
SAI/SIS/ ERAIL
Beta Version
WOrKfIOWS
A6.3.ISS development
fnalisedand
2nd version on-line
tested (101)
integrated
1st version online
Operationand
Operationand
Operation and
Operation and
A6.4.ISS operation
maintenance
02)
maintenance (103)
maintenance
maintenance
Technical Opinion
on Annex
updated
Recommendation
Simplifcation of CSI/
A6.5.CSM development
AG. Ensure proper
according to the
On Annex IV
CST
input/output forthe
lessons learned
CSMASLP Work
A6.6. Support to CSM
User support for
User support for
User support for
User support for
User support for
stream (100)
implementation
implementation
implementation
implementation
implem
implem.
FAQ based onthe
implementation of
the CSM developed。
Operators Voluntarily
Guidance on
A6.7 CSM guidance/ training
implementing the
ISS functioning
Training delivered
Training delivered
Training delivered
CSMidentifed
published
questions collected,
answers drafted and
published。
Normal: GoA
Normal: GOA
Normal: GOA
Normal: GoA
Normal: GoA
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
A6.8 GOAIJNS
follow-Up report
follow-up report
follow-Up report
follow-up report
follow-up report
Fast track: GOA
Fast track: GoA
Fast track: GOA
Fast track: GOA
Fast track: GoA
proposal
Droposal
Droposal
proposal
Droposal
(109}
It is important that
dedicated source of funding be identified for the business description and the setting of the ISS tool, as Well as the support for the Group of Analysts; in the absence of that;, the outputs of the work from the CSM ASLP work
stream risk to be Iost
101
Idem
(103} Idem
(103
Idem
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
125

Annexes
2022
Target
Action
Indicator
PIS code
baseline
2023 (93)
2024
2025
2026
2027
ERA.1227
A7.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1226 (104)
3.44
7.32
7.32
6.22
55
55
(annual Values)
ERA-REC-122
A7.2.Migration plan forthe
individual registers to a linked
data approach, including
Draft migration plan
Migration plan
the standardization of
prepared
fnalised
terminology through the ERA
terminology_
A7. Ensure proper
A7.3. Migration of registers to
input/output for the
knowledge graph approach
259
5096
759
1009
digitalisation of
(no code needed anymore)
Agency's registers
A7.4. Progress with the
Specifications
specifcations for multi-leg
fnalised
ticketing
A7.5. Agency becoming a
Proposal for EC
Workflows putin
registration
forvehicles
decision sent
place accordingly
at EUlevel
A7.6. Exploratory work for
Eurocontrol for railways;
Draft concept paper
Final concept paper
including the traffc
developed and
agreed with EC
management and economic
discussed with EC
regulation aspects
(10}
ERA1226 is included in the services contributing to the policy
specifically through their workstream
01
digitalisation, excluding the daily running of the registers。
126
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
entity
goal

8
Ensure sustainable resourcing and further effciency gains for the authority tasks
Target 
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
81.1. No.of FTEs allocated VA excluding CTT
11.7
11.7
11.7
11.7
11.7
81.2.No.of FTEs allocated VA CTT
4.8
4.8
4.5
4.5
81.3. No.of FTEs allocated SSC
5.2
5.1
4.9
48
48
81.4_
No.of FTEs allocated ERTMS TA
1.51
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
81. Ensure sustainable resourcing
forthe authority tasks
81.5. Proportion Of FTEs allocated to authority tasks
759
759
759
759
759
Which are billed
81.6 Overall FTEs redeployed from authority to
policyareas
cumulative values compared to
-3,87
4.21
-4.51
-4.91
-4.91
2022 baseline
1051
82.1. Internal mid-term review ofthe matrix
Mid-term review
Follow-up actions
organisation supporting authority tasks (including
82.Ensure a 1st review ofthe
AD/CAIAST
performed
implemented
Split)
authority related processes
82.2. List of identifed improvements for a future legal
List consolidated
List consolidated
framework update to be provided to the EC
and shared with EC
and shared with EC
Ensure a reductionin the Agency's administrative FTE allocation
Note 1: This objective is referred to the administrative FTE allocation, but encompasses
Wide scope (eg. redeploying administrative posts to operational activities, redeploying technical staffwho
currently cover administrative tasks to operational tasks activities).
Allreferences are to FTEs (not posts) to allow for counting savings and/or redeployments which account for partitions ofone FTE:
Note Z: The sequencing is thought as follows:
Creating the capacity Of potentially free FTEs through process leaning, including automation
as such; this does not account for a materialised saving, but is a pre-condition (step
(2)
i
Identifying the opportunities to materialise that capacity 一
this can
happen at contract end points (step C3)
i。
Having the FTEs freed from administrative work needs to be followed up by their actual redeployment in operational areas (step C4)
(105
This reflects the re-visited assumptions for the Use of ERA FTEs for VA, SSC, ERTMS TA compared to 2022 and also embeds
component of efficiency
through simplification/automation of processes。
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
127
gains

Annexes
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
C1.1. Workload analysis forall processes (operational
C1. Process/deliverable/job
Delivered
Updated
and support) based on a consistent methodology:
related workload analysis
C1.2. Workload analysis at job level
Draft
Finalised
C2.1. % of previously documented processes leaned,
209
209
209
209
2096
including through automation_
106)
C2.2.% ofnewly documented processes leaned by
design,as part ofthe Agency's management system
10096
1009
1009
1009
1009
linked to ICF
C2. Creating room for
C2.3.No.Of FTEs saved by leaning secretarial, HR, I,
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
administrative FTEs capacity
fnancial services and administrative functions linked
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
to operational work
C2.4.No.Of FTEs saved from optimising the Agency's
portfolio (clustering P/S, separating between genuine
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Sand processes; resorting to off-the-shelf IT products
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
etc)
C3.1. No of administrative FTEs not replaced
after
C3.
Materialising the FTE capacity
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
retirement; invalidity procedure; leaving the Agency
gained
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
etc)
C4.1.
Training programme for the Strengthening Plan
put in place as part ofthe Agency's Learning and
SetUp
Maintained
Maintained
Maintained
Maintained
Development plan
C4.2.No.ofadministrative FTEs retrained through the
C4. Redeploying the capacity tO
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
SPtraining programme, redeployed to operational
operational activities
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
activities
C4.3. No.of technical FTEs directly redeployed from
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
Part ofoverall
administrative tasks to technical work without the
target below
target below
target below
target below
target below
need fortraining:
C5.Overall FTEtarget part
C(non cumulativeannual
-0.5
1.25
-0.5
1
1
targets)
(106}
Baseline should be defined as
first step。
128
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
(e9:

0
Ensure the projected FTE evolution by 2027
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
01.1. No.of additional FTEs deployed to policy
priority areas
cumulative values compared to 2022
+11.23
+17.92
+15.82
+14.10
+14.10
baseline (based on part Aabove)
D1.2.No.Of FTEs redeployed from authority to policy
tasks
cumulative values compared to 2022 baseline
-3,87
-4.21
-4.51
-4.91
-4.91
(based on 81.6 above)
D1.Control the FTE trend
01.3. No.Of FTEs gained through effciency measures
evolution by 2027
cumulative Values; calculated based on the annual
0.5
-1.75
-2.25
-3.25
4.25
Values from C5
107)
01.4. Re-assessment of the additional FTE needs for
Prepared and
policy activities
agreed with EC
01.5. Gate Way review ofthe targets
Done
Done
D1.6. Input provided to EC for the next MFF
Provided
negotiations
any future Railway Package
E
Ensure effective and effcient budget management
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
E1.1. % of subsidy appropriations committed
Min. 9896
Min. 9896
Min. 989
Min. 989
Min. 989
Max. 109 forTI
Max. 109 forT1
Max. 109 forTl
Max. 109 fOrTI
Max. 109 fOrTI
El. Effective budget management
E1.2. % of
forward to the next year
Max. 2096 forT2
Max. 2096 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 3096 forT3
Max. 3096 forT3
Max. 309 forT3
Max. 309 fOrT3
Max. 309 fOrT3
E1.3. Salary gap structurally addressed
Done
Done
Done
Done
[2.1 . Realterm savings in the support expenditure
E2. Effcient budget management
29
29
29
29
296
(IT FM)
(107) This trend is based on the assumptions on FTE evolution for authority tasks as listed in line 81.6. Should the trend evolve in another direction, there will be
need to revisit the targets for B1.6,C5 and D1.1in a coordinated manner
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
129
carry

Annexes
4. Governance and monitoring arrangements
The SAP 2023-2027 is endorsed by the Management Board and steered by the HoU CAP
underthe coordination ofthe ED。
dedicated Task Force is put in place forthe period 2023-2027 to support the Action Plan
implementation composed of:
HoU CAP (Oana Gherghinescu)
CAP team members
Thomas Willems; Koen Favyts; Marta Lenarcik Andrei Lixan-
dru)
representative by unit, selected and nominated by the corresponding HoU, fol-
lowingan internal call for expression of interest (organised in Sep 2022)
Heads of Units/Heads of Departments will be accountable for their respective contribu-
tions. The involvement ofthe individual members in the Task Force is envisaged on a part
time basis, in addition to their daily tasks at the Agency。
Regular reporting is envisaged as follows:
Internal
regulariterations With the Agency s Management Team
A dedicated section willbe set Up as part of the SPD Dashboard to monitor the
progress ofthe indicators listed in Chapter 2 ofthis document byyear of reference
The SPD Dashboard is presented at every regular EB and MB meeting, Which offers
the possibility to MB members to regularly monitor the progress with the action
plan implementation
gate review with the Management Board can be envisaged
tWO years tO
make the necessary updates to the Action Plan, depending on the evolution in the
internal and external context ofthe Agency.
Annual reporting as part ofthe CAAR
Synergies With the Better Together and the HR strategy work streams will be carefully en-
sured bythe Task Force。
5.Risks
The following risks are identifed and assessed according to the matrix below:
Very likely
5
5
Likely
2
3
4
5
Likelihood of
Possible
2
3
4
4
consequence
Unlikely
2
2
3
4
3
3
unlikely
Negligible
Minor
Moderate
Signifcant
High
Impact
They will be monitored and addressed as part of Agencys risk register。
130
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
every
Very

Budget related
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
The Agency is carefully monitoring the budget execution to strike the optimal use of
1.The Agency might not be in the position to hire all 12 TAs in 2023 due to subsidy
the existing resources in the spirit of sound fnancial management; while flagging early
constraints. The inflation trend poses signifcant pressure on the Agency's capacity tO
warning signals in case of subsidy gaps. We Will react by an agile approach, having
coverthe
costs in the absence of suffcient additional EU subsidy。
reserve lists in place but only conclude employment contracts when the budgetary
means are available:
2.The revenues from Fees and Charges are not underthe full control ofthe Agency:
In particular the volume of work can fluctuate due to seasonal trends during the year;
but also more structurally, upwards
the need for re-certifcation following DAC
deployment; go-everywhere trains etc) or downwards
starting with the second
round of safety certification for the same RUat ERA , the complexity ofthe issues and
checks might
compared to the frst round)_
Human resources and internal communication related
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
3. The changes in the working patterns, together with the fnancial consideration for
hiring at lower grades; might limit the attractiveness for the specialised technical jobs
offered by the Agency in the future This might hamper the business continuity, talent
pool retention and by consequence; Agency's capacity to deliverthe technical outputs
envisaged in this plan。
4.Inherent internal communication sensitivity around the choices made as part of
The Agency will indeed tackle this aspect with attention, by highlighting and
the action plan (non-replacement; redeployment etc ). In addition, given this internal
supporting the opportunity of ensuring career paths from administrative tasks to
redeployment; the pressure on legally binding administrative tasks Will increase
operational tasks. Natural end-of-contract gate reviews will be used。
exponentially。
STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN (SAP) 2023-2027
131
salary
(e9:
(e9.
drop

Annexes
Output related
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
5. With insufficient additional resources for the policy tasks, up to the full level ofthe
need, the Agency might not be in the position to support the ECin responding to
all standardisation areas linked to innovation over the next years. The allocation of
additional resources might need to be reopened during the lifecycle ofthis Action Plan
to
identify priority areas for Which the Agency's involvement is further expected:
6.
Considering the complexity of the training program Which could help redeploying
administrative staff to operational tasks, it might have a limited
in andlor efficiency
and could require a period oftime for completion which
beyond the timeline of
the Strengthening Plan
Other
Risk
Risk
Mitigating measures
assessment
7.In 2021, the Agency received a
forits System Pillar workstream. While the
Ensuring a multi-annual continuity ofthe contribution agreement and an internal
provides the Agency with 3 FTEs to cover forthis work until May 2025.In the absence of
coordination ofthe system
work directly linked to the Railway System activities
an extension there is a risk of business continuity for this stream ofactivities
(ERTMS, TSIs, Safety).
132
SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2024-2026
buy
goes
grant
grant
pillar

Gettingin touch with the EU
In person
Alloverthe European Union there are hundreds of Europe Direct
information centres. You can fnd the address ofthe centre nearest YoU at:
https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/contact_
en
Onthe phone or by email
Europe Direct is a service that answers your questions about the European Union.
YoU can contact this service:
by freephone: 00 800 678 91011 (certain operators may charge forthese calls)
at the following standard number: +32 22999696 Or
by email via: https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/contact_en
Finding information about the EU
Online
Information about the European Union in allthe official languages ofthe EU
is available on the Europa website at: https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/index_en
EU publications
You can download or orderfree and priced EU publications at:
https:/lpublications.europa.eulen/publications. Multiple copies offree publications
may be obtained by contacting Europe Direct or your local information centre
(see https:/leuropa.euleuropean-union/contact_en)。
EU Iawand related documents
Foraccess to legal information from the EU, including all EU law since 1952 in all the offcial
language versions; 9o to EUR-Lex at: http:/leur-lex.europa.eu
Open data from the EU
The EU Open Data Portal (http:/ldata.europa.euleuodplen) provides access to datasets
from the EU. Data can be downloaded and reused forfree; both for commercialand
non-commercial purposes。

European Union Agency for Railways
120 rue Marc Lefrancq
BP 20392
FR-59307 Valenciennes Cedex
Tel +33 (0)327096500
eraeuropaeU
Twitter@ERArilways
Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe railway
system without frontiers。
EUROPEAN
Publications Office
UNION
of the European Union
AGENCY
FORRAILWAYS