European Union
Agency for
Railways
Single
Programming
Document
2025-2027
EUROPEAN
UNION
AGENCY
FOR RAILWAYS

Printed by XXXin XXXX
Manuscript completed in November 2024
Neither the Agency nor any person acting on behalfof the Agency is responsible for the use
Which might be made ofthe following information.
Luxembourg: Publications Office ofthe European Union, 2024
PRINT
ISBN 978-92-9477-474-3
doi:10.2821/4724111
TR-01-24-003-EN-C
PDF
ISBN 978-92-9477-473-6
doi:10.2821/4703801
TR-01-24-003-EN-N
Photo credits: @ sahachat (cover) , Markus Mainka (p.14), Leonid Andronov (p.17), Marco2811 (p.46), Jonas Mittag (p.65)/
stockadobecom
European Union Agency for Railways; 2023
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. Forany use or reproduction of individual
photos or illustrations; permission must be sought directly from the
copyright holders。

Contents
List ofacronyms
Foreword
8
Mission statement
10
General context
14
|
Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
17
A. Structure ofthe multiannual programme 2025-2027.
18
B
Content ofthe multiannual programme 2025-2027
19
81. Strategic statement
There
nO
longer be any technical and
operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by
rail, assets can be reused throughout Europe
22
8.2.
Strategic statement
2 &
3
Rail Will become the backbone that
supports
an
environmentally
Sustainable
multimodal
transport
system
and
Will
be favoured
as
transport
mode by the
new
generation; rail traffic will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as
Service)and Laas (Logistic as
Service) will be ensured, including
multi-leg ticketing _
28
8.3. Strategic statement 4
Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure
mode oftransport for its users and workers
29
8.4. Strategic statement 5
Rail will be resilient and agile in responding to
emergency situations。
32
B.5. Strategic statement 6
Rail Will become increasingly economically
competitive as a mode and as a sector_
33
B.6. Strategic Statement 7
The EU will become the global reference for
railand ERA authorisations will be globally recognised _
34
8.7. Strategic statement
8
The Agency Will ensure
an effective and
effcient governance of its portfolio of activities in order to offer the
best value for money to citizens and business in the EU.
37
B.8. Strategic statement 9
The Agency will ensure a performant working
environment; based on high-quality motivated human resources and
a collaborative behaviour。
38
Human and fnancial resources
outlook for the years 2025-2027
(.1.
Overview ofthe past and current situation.
C.2. Outlook for the years 2025
2027
42
C.3. Resource programming for the years 2025
2027
43
C.4.
Strategy for achieving effciency gains.
43
C.5. Negative priorities _
decrease of existing tasks.
44
川
Annual Work programme 2025 _
46
A
Executive summary
47
6
Programmes
48
B.1.
Strategic statement
There Will no
longer be any technical and
operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by
rail, assets can be reused throughout Europe.
48
Will

B.2. Strategic statement 2 &
3
Rail will become the backbone that
supports
an
environmentally
Sustainable
multimodal
transport
system
and
Will
be favoured
as
transport mode by the
new
generation; rail traffic Will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as
Service) and Laas (Logistic as a Service)
be ensured, including
multi-leg ticketing
53
B.3. Strategic Statement 4
Rail will be an increasingly safe and secure
mode oftransport for its users and workers
54
B.4. Strategic Statement 5
Rail will be resilientand agile in responding to
emergency situations.
57
B.5. Strategic Statement 6
Rail will become increasingly economically
competitive as a mode and as a sector.
57
B.6. Strategic Statement 7
The EU will become the global reference for
railand ERA authorisations Will be globally recognised _
58
B.7. Strategic Statement 8
The Agency will
ensure
an effective and
efficient governance of its portfolio of activities in order to offer the
best value for money to citizens and business in the EU.
59
8.8. Strategic Statement 9 - The Agency Will ensure a performant working
environment based on high-quality motivated human resources and
collaborative behaviour.
61
I。 Annexes
65
Annex .
Organisational chart
66
Annex |l
Resource allocation per activity 2025-2027
69
Annex Ill. Financial resources
70
A.1 .
Revenue_
70
A.2.
Expenditures。
72
A.3
Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations
75
Annex IV.
Human Resources 2025-2027
quantitative
76
A.1. Staff population and its evolution: overview ofall categories of staff.
76
A.2.
Multiannual staff policy plan 2023-2027
78
A.3.
Recruitment forecasts 2025 following retirement
mobility or new
requested posts。
80
AnnexV。
Human Resources 2025-2027
qualitative。
81
Recruitment (engagement) policy。
81
A.1. Implementing rules in place _
A.2. Selection and engagement procedures
8
A3. Temporary agents _
82
A.4. Contract agents。
83
A.5. Seconded National Experts
83
A.6. Trainees
84
A.7. Structural service providers。
84
B.
Appraisal and reclassification
promotions。
84
8.1. Implementing rules in place.
84
B.2.
Reclassifcation oftemporary staff。
85
B.3. Reclassifcation of contract staff_
86
B.4. Mobility policy _
87
Gender representation
88
C.1. Data n 31/12/2023 statutory staff (only officials; TAs and CAs).
88
0.
Geographical balance.
89
D.1. Officials; TAs, and CAs。
89
0.2.
Evolution of 5 years ofthe most represented nationality in the Agency
91
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Will

[
Schooling.
AnnexVl.
Environment management
92
A.1. Executive summary.
92
A.2. ERA in the broader policy context related to environment。
92
A.3.
Environmental impacts Of ERA activities
95
A.4. Accountability ceiling Of ERA _
95
A.5. Environment management initiatives and actions completed in 2024 96
A.6.
Environment management achievements of ERA until 2023 
97
A.7. Environment management initiatives and planned actions _
A.8.
Current status and plan for certifications and standards _
01
AnnexVIl.
Building policy
year 2025 _
102
A.1 .
Current building(s).
102
A.2.
Building project in the planning phase.
02
A.3
Building projects submitted to the European Parliament and Council
103
Annex VIll. Privileges and immunities
104
Annex IX.
Evaluations
106
Annex X. Strategy for the organisational management and internal
control systems _
108
Annex Xl. Plan for grant contribution, or service-level agreements。
112
Annex XIl. Strategy for cooperation with third countries andlor
international organisations。
14
Annex XII。
Procurement plan.
115
Annex XIV. Strengthening Action Plan
17
A.1 .
Context
17
A.2. What we want to achieve。
17
A.3. Objectives, actions, indicators, and targets
18
A.4.
Governance and monitoring arrangements
128
A5.
Risks。
28

List ofTables
Table 1
Human resources 2023-2025
41
Table 2
Revenues 2023-2025
41
Table 3
Expenditure 2023-2025
42
Table 4 - Financial resources
Outlook 2025-2027
43
Table 5
Human resources
Outlook 2025-2027
43
Table 6
Number of posts for each organisational entity
67
Table 7 -
Overview ofrevenues
69
Table 7 _ Overview ofrevenues
70
Table 8
General revenues
70
Table 9
Overview on additional EU funding _
Table 10 - Additional EU funding: grant contribution and service-level
agreements。
Table 11
Expenditure
72
Table 12
Commitment appropriations (EU contribution) _
72
Table 13
Commitment appropriations (Fees and charges)
74
Table 14 - Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations 
75
Table 15 - Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant
contribution or service-level agreements
77
Table 16 - Structural service providers
77
Table 17 _ Interim workers
77
Table 18
Temporary Agents。
78
Table 19 - Contract Agents。
79
Table 20 - Seconded National Experts _
79
Table 21
Recruitment forecast.
80
Table 22
Implementing rules related to appraisal of performance and
reclassifcation
promotion.
84
Table 23
Reclassifcation of temporary staff。
85
Table 24
Reclassifcation of contract staff
86
Table 25
Data on 31/12/2023 - statutory staff only (offcials, TAand CA).
88
Table 26
Data regarding gender evolution over 5 years of the Middle and
Senior management ()
88
Table 27
Data on 31/12/2023 - statutory Staff only (officials, TA and CA).
89
Table 28
Evolution over 5 years ofthe most represented nationality in
the Agency.
91
Table 29 - Current building(s).
102
Table 30 - Privileges granted to
104
Table 31
Grant contributions, or service-level agreements
12
Table 32
New procurement procedures to be launchedin 2025
15
Table 33
Planned use in 2025 of existing ERA framework contracts
115
Table 34 -
Planned use in 2025 of existing inter-institutional framework
contracts
116
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Staff

List ofacronyms
AD
Administrator
AMOCS
Acceptable Means of Compliance
AO
Authorising Officer
AOD
Authorising Officer by Delegation
AR
Agency Regulation
ASLP
Assessment of Safety Leveland Performance
AST
Assistant
ATO
Automatic Train Operations
BOA
Board of Appeal
BCA
Baseline Compatibility Analysis
CA
Contract Agent
CAAR
Consolidated Annual Activity Report
CCM
Change Control Management
CCS
Control Command and Signalling
CEOS
Conditions of Employment of Other Servants
COR
Common Occurrence Reporting
COVID-19
Coronavirus pandemic (SARS-CoV-2)
CSIs
Common Safety Indicators
CSMs
Common Safety Methods
CSTs
Common Safety Targets
CUI
Common User Interface
DAC
Digital Automatic Coupler
DG BUDG
Directorate-General for Budget
DGDIGIT
Directorate-General for Informatics
DGMOVE
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport
DGNEAR
Directorate-General for Neighbourhood and Enlargement
Negotiations
Dol
Declaration of Interest
EASA
European Union Aviation Safety Agency
EB
Executive Board
EC
European Commission
ECA
European Court of Auditors
ECM
Entity in Charge of Maintenance
EECT
Extended ERA Core Team
EFTA
European Free Trade Association
EMSA
European Maritime Safety Agency
EPSO
European Personnel Selection Offce
ERA
European Union Agency for Railways
ERADIS
ERA Database on Interoperability and Safety
ERATV
European Register of Authorised Types of Vehicles
EU RailJU
Europes Rail Joint Undertaking
ERSAD
European Railway Stations Accessibility Database
LISTOF ACRONYMS

ERTMS
European Rail Traffc Management System
ESG
Economic Steering Group
ESO
European Standardisation Organisation
ETCS
European Train Control System
EU
European Union
EUAN
EU Agencies Network
EUMedRail
EuroMed Rail Safety and Interoperability Project
EVR
European Vehicle Register
FFR
Framework Financial Regulation
FM
Facility Management
FRMCS
Future Railway Mobile Communication System
FTE
Full Time Equivalent
FWC
Framework Contract
GoA
Group Of Analysts
GSMR
Global System for Mobile Communications (Railway)
HOF
Human and Organisational Factors
HQ
Headquarters
HR
Human Resources
IAS
Internal Audit Service ofthe Commission
ICC
Internal Control Coordinator
ICF
Internal Control Framework
ICT
Information and Communication Technologies
IM
Infrastructure Manager
IMCS
Internal Management and Control System
IMS
Integrated Management System
INEA
The Innovation and Networks Executive Agency
IOA
Inventory Of Assets
IPA
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance
IRSC
International Railway Safety Council
ISO
International Organisation for Standardization
ISS
Information Sharing System
I
Information Technology
JNS
Joint Network Secretariat
J
Joint
Undertaking
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
Laas
Logistic as a Service
Maas
Mobility as a Service
MB
Management Board
MFF
Multiannual Financial Framework ofthe European Union
MMRR
Monthly Monitoring Review Report
MS
Member State ofthe European Union
MT
Management Team
NIB
National Investigation Body
NOBO
Notifed Body
NSA
National Safety Authority
NTRs
National Technical Rules
NVR
National Vehicle Register
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

OSJD
Organization for Co-operation between Railways
OSS
One-Stop Shop
OTIF
Organisation for International Carriage by Rail
PCP
Priority Countries Programme
POE
Poolof Experts
Pg
Programme
PgM
Programme Manager
PgO
Programme Owner
PR
Public Relation
P/S
Project/ Service
PRM
Persons with reduced mobility
RASCOP
Rail Standardisation Coordination Platform
RBs
Recognition Bodies
RDD
Reference Document Database
EC Regulation
RFC
Rail Freight Corridors
RINF
Register of Infrastructures
RISC
Railway Interoperability and Safety Committee
RMR
Radio Mobile for Railways
RSD
Railway Safety Directive
RSG
Research Steering Group
RU
Railway Undertaking
SAIT
Safety Alert ITTool
SAP
Strengthening Action Plan 2023-2027
SCS
Safety Culture Survey
SERA
Single European Railway Area
SLA
Service Level Agreement
SM
Service Manager
SMS
Safety Management System
SNE
Seconded National Expert
SO
Service Owner
SP
Safety Performance
SPD
Single Programming Document
SPSG
System Pillar steering group
SRD
Single Rules Database
SSC
Single Safety Certifcate
TA
Temporary Agent
TA
Trackside Approvals
TAF
Telematics Applications for Freight
TAP
Telematics Applications for Passenger Services
TDG
Transport of Dangerous Goods
TSI
Technical Specifcations for Interoperability
UIC
International Union of Railways
VA
Vehicle Authorisation
VKM
Vehicle Keeper Marking
WP
Work Programme
4RP
Fourth Railway Package
LISTOF ACRONYMS | 7
Reg:

Foreword
Since its creation 20 years ago, ERA has been supporting the European railway stakehold-
ers, carrying out an ever-increasing set of crucial tasks for the EU railways。
After ten years of mandate as ERA Executive Director
am proud ofthe achievements the
Agency has realised and
remain confident that it will bring even more added value to
the railway sector in the future, especially with the progressive development of the Single
European Railways Area, in line With the political guidelines and priorities expressed
for the new European Commission。
In the recent years; we have witnessed many worrying trends;, such as the resurgence of
war on the European continent certain macroeconomic
challenges;
as Wellas increas-
ingly serious climate change impacts across the world. In such worrying environment
transport has a crucial role to play, not only in ensuring the safe transport of people and
goods; but as wellin the decarbonisation of the sector and its adaptability to
changing
climate. With only 5 years remaining before the 2030 objectives set in the EC Sustainable
Josef Doppelbauer
and Smart Mobility Strategy, it Will be essential to ensure sustained progress towards the
achievement of the set targets. Safety is also
crucial element for railways, and we need
to ensure the
appropriate measures and checks are in place to continuously improve it. "A
sustainable; safe European transport system Without frontiers" does therefore not only rep-
resent our Agency's vision statement; but also reflects the ambition the rail sectorat large。
In line with its mandate; the European Union Agency for Railways aims at covering a wide
range ofareas Of work involving actions to drive the continuation of the progress with
railway safety and interoperability, together with its role of EU-wide authority for Vehicle
Authorisation, Single Safety Certification, and ERTMS Trackside Approval.
The multi-annual
Work programme 2025-2027, together with the annual programme
2025 have been planned and prepared following the principles ofthe intervention log
ic. In addition, the work programme was prepared reflecting the conclusions of the SPD
2025 Workshop held with the Management Board in June 2023.
The year 2025 Will also be an important milestone for our Authority activities; as it marks
the sixth year since the start Of the Agency's Authority activities according to the tech-
nical pillar of the 4th Railway Package. The Agency has signifcant experience in run-
ning the tasks related to its Authority role; as Well as in forecasting their volume to the
best extent possible. However, the volatility ofthe applications and their volumes can still
greatly differ from one year to the other which renders the planning of activities and the
detailed forecast Of revenues somewhat complex. It is important to note that the Agency
has reached an increasingly higher maturity level with the processing ofauthorisation and
certifcation tasks; Which has a potential for driving a higher efficiency in their delivery。
In addition, in 2025, the Agency will enter the second half of the implementation ofthe
Strengthening Action Plan, highlighting the critical importance of areas Of works such
as: TSIs and national rules clean UP, ERTMS, CSM ASLP the monitoring of NSAs and NoBos,
as Wellas data and digitalization. As a result; the Agency received an increase of 12 tem-
porary agent posts (TAs) starting in 2023, which should be entirely covered through the
Agency's existing stream Of revenues. The latter represents a signifcant challenge; espe-
cially in the context of a volatile pattern of inflation. Continuously; the Agency is making a
thorough assessment ofits capacity to cover these costs in a sustainable manner until the
end ofMFF 2021-2027.This is duly reflected in the current SPD 2025.
The SPD 2025 reflects the Strengthening Action Plan through the assignment ofthe addi-
tional posts, as Wellas the internal redeployment following efficiency
tothe priority
areas identifed in the Strengthening Plan. Additionally, the Agency is making sustained
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
gains

efforts fora combined response to the
resourcing challenge by increasing the direct uti-
lisation Of its resources, both in terms of budget and FTEs.The SPD reflects equally the
Workload related to the new TSI revision package; including the planned work in relation
to the definition of specifications for the innovation stemming from the EU RailJU。
The Agency keeps a strong commitment to deploying the necessary resources to meet
the legal deadlines related to issuing OfVA, SSC and ERTMS Trackside approvals; While also
respecting the deadlines for its safety and interoperability policy related activities; allof
Which contribute to the achievementofthe high-level policy objectives ofthe 4th Railway
Package. The decision time linked to the authority tasks has undeniably a tremendous
impact on the rail stakeholders and on the competitiveness of rail compared with other
Sectors. The year 2025 appears marked with peaks of work in the feld ofthe authorisation
tasks, especially linked to the ambitious ERTMS and DAC programmes in Europe. This pos-
eS a
signifcant pressure on the Agency in terms of resource availability in order to respect
the legal deadlines, which will need to be carefully handled。
In response to the tragic rail accident in Greece in February 2023, with unmeasurable hu-
man loss and drastic economic impacts, the Agency has developed a strategic paper with
proposals to enhance the structural response in Europe to avoid such accidents in other
Member States affected by the same weaknesses and failures in their respective national
rail systems。
This strategic papertitled 'Strengthening Operational Safety (SOS) in Europe; endorsed by
the Managementin 2023, proposes 2 key initiatives based on a detailed problem analysis;
clear objectives and business requirements, including the estimation of budget and FTEs:
The Priority Countries Programme (PCP), entailing a risk-based approach in
orderto identify the key areas of intervention to consistently safeguard and boost
Safety levels across the EU Member States;
The Information Sharing System (ISS), as a centralized, pro-active; performing
and technology-proof Information Sharing System for railways in the EU to Sup-
port the implementation ofthe CSM ASLP
While such initiatives have the potential of boosting operational safety across the EU, there
is unfortunately not an associated legal and fnancial statement. The Agency will continue
to work closely with the EC and with the MSs for unlocking this important stream ofwork
in the future。
Would like to assure the members ofthe Management Board that the Agency will continue
to implement the mechanism already put in place for a regular monitoring of the SPD
implementation in terms of outputs delivery and resource consumption, as wellas ofthe
Strengthening Action Plan. The Agency will also continue to improve the set of budget ex-
ecution
monitoring actions already established to make best use of the available budget
appropriations: The Agency Will continue to strengthen its tools to better plan, monitor and
report So as to continuously increase its data-driven, transparent and efficient working cul-
ture. Inaddition, more efforts will be produced toachieve more with less resources, as wellas
ensuring thatthe processes within the Agency are streamlined to deliver high-quality results
toallour stakeholders, in line with the
Strengthening Action Plan 2023-2027.
The Agency will also continue to work closely with its stakeholders in order to ensure the
Successful implementation of this challenging multi-annual programme in line with the
priorities of the new European Commission. These activities of the Agency are crucial
for contributing to the achievement of a significant modal shift to rail, in particular by help-
ing to create and manage a Single European Rail Area,and to continuously improve railway
safetyin Europe. Atthe same time; we Will continue our efforts to progress towards a culture
of collaboration in the Agency。
Would like to thank the ERA staff and allour stakeholders
for their dedication and support; that
am sure Will continue for the years to come; as We
Will work towards an improved European transport system, multimodalin nature; with railas
its backbone; eventually beneftting from a fully functioning Single European Railway Area。
Josef Doppelbauer
FOREWORD

Mission statement
The vision and mission statements ofthe Agency ("A sustainable; safe European transport
system Without frontiers" and "Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe railway SyS-
tem Without frontiers" respectively) were defned in 2021. They reflect its current position
and role; while of course remaining fully in line with the legal mandate ofthe Agency。
The Agency contributes to the further development and effective functioning ofa Single
European Railway Area Without frontiers; by guaranteeing
high level of railway Safety
and interoperability; While improving the competitive position ofthe railway sector; as en-
visaged bythe Agency Regulation 2016/796.In particular, the Agency shall contribute on
technical matters; to the implementation of Union legislation by developing a common
approach to Safety on the Union rail system and by enhancing the level of interoperabil-
ity on the Union rail system and associated data, with
specifc focus on facilitating the
interoperable deployment of ERTMS and on access to data for pushing rail modernisation
and digitalisation. By working in close cooperation with the national authorities acting in
the felds Of railway safety and interoperability; the Agency will substantially contribute
to an increased competitiveness ofrail and to the seamless cross-border traffic in the EU。
Moreover through timely delivery of appropriate regulation that reflects the harmonised
and validated solution proposals from the Europes Rail Joint Undertaking, the Agency
contributes signifcantly to the coordinated and
deployment of such solutions; thus
strengthening the competitiveness Of rail in the transport
mix。
All these elements are
translated into rail becoming more attractive and affordable for passengers and freight;
with the Agency playing an active role in supporting the delivery ofthe European Green
Deal for the EU citizens and businesses:
Vision statement
Mission statement
Sustainable; Safe European transport system
Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe
without frontiers
railway system Without frontiers
To foster its mission, the Agency has identified the following fundamentals (F) and ena-
blers (E):
10
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
rapid

ERA Fundamentals: Attributes
Sociallyand
Understand
F1.3
environmentally
F2.3
transport system
F3.3
Fairness and respect
F4.3
Transparency
responsible organization
complexity
AILour decisions are determined to
We acknowledge and take into
Our decisions are made with
We defne our priorities and monitor
serve the common good and the
account the legacy ofthe EU rail
impartiality, integrity and objectivity。
them in atransparent manner。
public interest:
system the complexity ofthe
Our loyalty to the organisation and
We evaluate the effects ofall OUr
interactions between the Various
each otheris essential to achieve OUr
actions on staffand stakeholders。
modes oftransport and levels of
mission. We resolve conflicts based
This serves as input to drive future
decision.
on mutual respect。
improvement。
Looking for excellence
F1.2
Data Driven Organisation
F2.2
Learn from experience
F3.2
F4.2
Sustainable activities
in its diversity
Our collaborative analysis supports
We are looking for learning
We value the diversity Ofour
In the allocation of resources, we
decisions based on objective data。
opportunities internally and with
team and encourage a supportive
primarily consider ERAs priorities
external partners. We learn from errors
cooperation amongall
without
While caring for the wellbeing
ratherthan to blame. We see feedback
distinction striving for excellence
Off staffand the impact onthe
aS a Way to
improve our performance:
stakeholders。
F1.1
Mission driven organization
F2.1
Customer's needs
F3.1
Trust and pride
F4.1
Performance
We areall aware Of ERA's mission
We continuously analyse Who are
ERAis a
place to Work with a
We adopt an innovative spirit
and we are committed to support
Our direct and indirect stakeholders
strong sense of
belonging; pride and
considering rules as a tooland
together the achievement ofour
and their needs. We adoptan
fulflment
not an objective. We reward
business objectives。
exploratory and impartial attitude
performance atall levels:
to propose measures fortheir
problems, needs and opportunities:
Build a sustainable
Understand the transport
Work all together
Monitor our contribution
and safe European
and
mobility reality
as ateam
to the railway system
transport system
F1
F2
F3
F4
MISSION STATEMENT
11
Staff
good

Mission statement
Organisational cultural enablers: Attributes
E1
E2
[3
E4
INTERACTING
FORMALISING
DISSEMINATING
REINFORCING
Teamwork
Roles
E1.1
[2.1
E3.1
Communication
E4.1
Leading by example
and collaboration
and responsibilities
Collaboration withinand across
Roles, responsibilities and authorities
Information is openly shared within
Managers exhibit behaviours that
organisations is nurtured.
are understood and accepted.
and across organisations。
set the standard.
[1.2
Interpersonal values
[2.2
Organisational design
[3.2
Competence management
E4.2
Management intervention
respect and openness
Organisational structures support
Competence management ensures
Managers ensure that incentives;
permeate the
organisationand
the achievement of missionand
knowledgeable workforce.
sanctions and recognition reinforce
characterise inter-organisational
organisational excellence。
behaviours and outcomes that
relationships atall levels。
support the achievement of mission
and
organisational excellence:
E1.3
Regulatory relationships
[2.3
Organisational systems
E3.3
Soft skills
[4.3
HOF expertise
Healthy regulatory relationships exist
Processes; tools and documentation
Leadership and non-technical skills
Human and organisational factors;
and ensure that the accountability
support the achievement of mission
are
systematically developed。
including frontline experience; are
remains With the Agency
and organisational excellence:
systematically considered during
designand change:
12
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Trust

Through its mission and actions, the Agency is committed to contribute to the EC Political
guidelines:
European Green Deal
an economy that works for people
Europe ft for the digitalage
stronger Europe in the world
The Agency will support the EC agenda to ensure sustainable, safe, affordable; and acces-
sible transport and to strengthen railways' role in the transport mix, in line with its mission
and mandate:
MISSION STATEMENT
13

General context

Transport is an essential part ofthe European integration, especially given its contribution
to the
functioning of the
movement Of services; goods, and people: Transport also
represents around 99 ofthe EU gross added value and directly employs around
11
mil-
lion workers; therefore representing an important sector for society at large. EU transport
policies have been developed according to the
principles of safety sustainability, resil-
ience; connectivity, and effciency。
Through its long-term vision for the transport sector and European society; the European
Commission published in 2020 the Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy with
a de-
tailed action plan of 82 initiatives. With this strategy; the Commission presents how the
EUtransport system will achieve its needed green and digital transformation and become
more resilient:
As outlined in the European Green Deal the result will be
a 909 cut in
carbon emissions by 2050. Regarding the rail sector; the following targets have been set:
Traffic on high-speed rail will double by 2030;
Rail freight traffc Will increase by 5096 by 2030 and double by 2050;
By 2030, rail and waterborne-based intermodal transport will be able to compete
on equal footing with road-only transport in the EU.
The European Union Agency for Railways Will support the European Commission, in line
With its accountability ceiling, in achieving these goals, in particular through the further
development and effective functioning ofa Single European Railway Area Without fron-
tiers
The 2025-2027 programming period for the Agency involves two different types of activ-
ities:
The policy tasks contributing to the implementation of Union legislation by devel-
oping a common approach to safety on the Union rail system and by enhancing
the level of interoperability on the Union rail system, taking into account the pol-
icy priorities identifed in the Strengthening Plan and implemented through the
Strengthening Action Plan 2023-2027.
The fully fledged performance ofthe Agency's tasks as EU-wide authority for Safety
certifcation, vehicle authorisation and ERTMS trackside approval, along with other
tasks in the feld of railway Safety and interoperability as foreseen in the Technical
Pillar ofthe Fourth Railway Package:
The Agency continues to implement its work programme following the principles ofthe
intervention logic, in line with the guidelines provided by the Networkof EU Agencies. The
intervention logic supports the Agency by emphasising the desired changes and the road
to its achievement. It is also a
thinking process supporting the Agency to design, reconsid-
er, and adapt its outputs to the most effective one for a determined outcome.
The Agency also strives to increase its efficiency in delivering the outcomes and impacts
expected by EU citizens. In light ofthe above; the work programme ofthe Agency (in its
multi-annualand annual planning) is organised around seven strategic statements; Which
project the Agency's role in relation to its stakeholders, complemented by two transver-
Sal
strategic statements; Which capture the Agency's governance and support functions。
These strategic statements have been in place since the adoption of SPD 2022-2024 and
are extremely important as they show the direction oftravel on which the Agency plans
to embark in order to make railways Work better for society, subject of course to its remit
and accountability ceiling:
In addition, SPD 2025-2027 will follow and align itself with the actions and resource allo-
cations detailed in the Strengthening Action Plan adopted by the MB in November 2022.
The seven priority areas Will be highlighted in the annual section and their importance
Will be reflected both in terms Of FTE and budget allocation. Of course; the Agency Will
remain flexible and redeploy resources ifneeded but this innovative approach provides
roadmap for all stakeholders regarding the areas on Which the Agency will focus in the
coming years。
GENERAL CONTEXT
15
free
Key

General context
Thanks tO
joint effort with the European Commission and the support from the Man-
agement Board, the Agency was granted 12 additional TAs to its establishment plan to
implementthe Strengthening Plan. However; these additional resources must be fnanced
within the existing budget envelope; With no additional subsidy allocation, Which creates
budgetary pressure on the Agency. In addition, the volatility related to indexation adds
an addition degree of uncertainty. The Agency will closely monitor all factors impacting
the budget and Will revise and revisit its proposalin the course of 2024 With caution and
regularity。
The Agency Will also pay significant attention to
regular monitoring ofthe SPD imple-
mentation in terms Of outputs, resource consumption and revenues, which can allow for
agile responses and possible adaptation ofits work programme:
Starting 2025, the Agency willimplement a
new
portfolio structure based on 22 pro-
grammes instead of 69 projects and services in order to streamline the portfolio adminis-
tration and to have a more meaningful and effcient deployment of budget and FTEs, in
line With the actual areas Of work. The Agency will also complete in 2025 a key deliverable
from the SAP: the leaning ofall the Agency's processes. By the completion ofthis impor-
tant milestone; the Agency should gain efficiency and further streamline its administrative
Workstream.
The Agency will also continue to work with the poolof experts forthe mutual beneft of
the cooperation between the Agency and the NSAs. This cooperation may also help the
Agency to tackle capacity shortages, as Wellas language skills gaps. In addition, the Agen-
Cy Will strive for continuously improving its effciency in delivering the expected outputs,
as Wellas its overall performance in
contributing to the expected outcomes and impacts:
16
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Multi-annual programming
2025-2027

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
A。
Structure ofthe multiannual programme 2025-2027
The structure of the Agency's multi-annual work programme is organised according to
strategic statements:
Strategic Statement 1
There Will no longer be any technical and operational
barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail, assets can be reused
throughout Europe。
Strategic Statement 2
Rail will become the backbone that supports an envi-
ronmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will be favoured as
transport mode by the new generations。
Strategic Statement 3
Rail traffic Will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as
Service) and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will be ensured, including multi-leg tick-
eting:
Strategic Statement
Rail Will be an increasingly safe and secure mode of
transport for its users and workers。
Strategic Statement 5
Rail will be resilient and agile in responding to emergen-
situations。
Strategic Statement 6
Rail will become increasingly economically competitive
as a modeand asa sector
Strategic Statement 7 -The EU will become the global reference for rail and ERA
authorisations will be globally recognised:
Strategic Statement 8
The Agency Will ensure an effective and effcient gov-
ernance ofits portfolio of activities in order to offer the best value for money to
citizens and business in the EU
Strategic Statement 9
The Agency will ensure a performant working environ-
ment; based on high quality motivated resources and a collaborative behaviour。
Following guidance from the EU Agencies' network on the SPD, the Agency proposed for
SPD 2023-2025 to use the intervention logic on these strategic statements to identify im-
pactand outcomes. With SPD 2024-2026, the Agency added a new concept: intermediate
outcome. Given that outcomes are quite diffcult to influence directly from outputs, the
conceptofintermediate outcomes Is
interesting given its more direct link with the Agency
and its influence on outcomes
Accountability ceiling

岂
Impacts
Outcomes
Incercoediete
Outputs
Activities
Inputs
鹭
limited
inimeece
Some influence
Total control
influence
The Agency has therefore started to develop intermediate outcomes in each strategic
statement. For intermediate outcomes;
a set Of common interventions was defned by
the Agency:
18
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Very

Building knowledge
Monitoring and analysing
ERA
sector builds non-existing knowledge
ERA monitors the sector and its progress
Regulating
Reinforcing
EU laws and regulations are put in place to
巫
Possibilities to enforce
reinforce measures
achieve the desired outcome
to improve the current status in the railway
Sector
Knowledge sharing
ERA shares knowledge with the sector (i.e.
training; reports; etc)
These types ofinterventions support the multiannual work programme and assess where
additional work is most needed to achieve the desired outcomes. The multiannual section
Will also reflect the results Of the MB workshop on SPD 2025-2027 Which took place in
June 2023.
In addition, it should be noted that the resource arbitration exercise for the year 2025 Was
further developed and intensifed. Indeed,it followed the key principles and areas ofprior-
ities detailed in the Strengthening Action Plan (annex XIV). In addition, the Agency priori-
tised through the identifcation ofthe anticipated added value of activities, as wellas their
potential contribution towards the desired outcomes. The Agency followed a data-driven
approach, looking at previous years resource consumption, as well
as the deliverables
description foreach programme:
B。
Content ofthe multiannual programme 2025-2027
For its 2025-2027 work programme; the Agency considers the possible ways of balancing
the demand forits authority workon one hand and the ambition level forthe priority areas
detailed in the Strengthening Plan, on the other hand. The authorisations, certifcates and
approvals issued by the Agency have a direct impact on the functioning ofthe rail sector
and bring much added value in terms of safety and interoperability。
Furthermore; should the required additional resources become available; the Agency
Would implement together With Member States;
Priority Country Programme (PCP)
Which is a strategic initiative that aims to assess and monitor the state Of railway safety and
interoperability legislation implementation in Member States providing a comprehensive
picture Of railway safety and helping the MS to identify areas for improvement. In this
perspective; the Agency has additionally developed a robust business case for the devel-
opment ofa supporting Information Sharing System (ISS), whose objective is to improve
railway safety in the European Union through the sharing and analysis ofrelevant safety infor-
mation, supported by a pro-active; performing and technology-proofsystem ofdata exchange:
In addition, the strategic role in policy development; research and innovation, and advice
provided by the Agency is recognised as highly important and should continue to be
strengthened. It is equally important to highlight the possible role ofthe Agency to mon-
itor and support the adequate implementation ofthe existing legal framework through
harmonised level of maturity both at the levels of operators and national authorities。
To make its operations always more effcient and effective; the Agency Will continue to
implement to its full extent the continuous improvement approach to its portfolio and
programme management and make sure that its resources are deployed in those activi-
ties Where it can have the highest impact and added value for the railway sector and the
EU citizens. The Agency will also continue to develop its workstream on cybersecurity and
Will liaise with ENISA to explore future scope for cooperation . Following the cybersecurity
regulation, the Agency Will need to increase its resources spent on this item, Which is re-
flected in the Annual Work Programme:
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
19

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
The breakdown of FTEand budget distribution by Strategic Statement overthe 2024-2027
period are shown in the following charts:
Figure 1 - FTE distribution by strategic statement
2024
2025
2026
2027
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Ststl
Stst2&3
Stst4
Ststs
Stst6
Stst7
Ststg
Ststg
Figure 2 - Budget distribution by strategic statement
2024
2025
2026
2027
1000 000
2000000
3000000
4000000
5000 000
6000 000
Ststl
Stst2&3
Stst4
Ststs
Stst6
Stst7
Stst8
Ststg
20
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

The following table lists the main Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for 2025:
Strategic
Key Performance Indicator
Target
Statement
Progress report to RISCin
TSIrevision
June 2025
CCS TSI Maintenance and operational activities
Update CCS TSI with error
for CCS Framework
Corrections
No.Of NoBo audits/inspections performed per
20
year
Within 10 working days, as
Register's related service requests by customers
determined in the service
processed (reply provided to customer)
levelagreement
Issuing SSC/VA
ERTMSTA
Proportion of
decisions taken according to the legal framework
1009
deadlines
No.of NSA audit performed
Fast trackand normal
Group of Analysts/JNS
procedures managed
according to plan
Delivery ofthe activities as planned in the
Communication & Dissemination Planand at
Delivered as planned
least one annual report on those activities to MB。
% Ofthe annual appropriations committed
989
% Execution of carry over payment
>959
appropriations
% Payments made by contractual deadline
959
Increase ofachievement
Output achievement rate
rate compared with the
previous year
Implementation ofthe Strengthening Action
Implemented following
Plan
the SAP deadlines
% Implementation of the establishment plan
>989
9
Implementation ofthe external personnel ()
>989
plan
Staff turnover
Less than 59
9
Availability ofthe core ICT systems
959
Service Desk users' satisfaction feedback "Goodl
>709
Excellent'
rate
CA + SNE combined
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
21

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
87. Strategic statement 1
There Willno longer beany
technicaland operational barriers
to the free movement of people
and goods by rail, assets can be
reused throughout Europe
Delivering VA
Manage ERTMS
lonfterm
Authority Tasks Support
evolution
System
Railway
Pillar
Rolling stockand
opertation
fxed installations
harmoni-
Delivering
Interoperable data
harmonisation
sation
TA
In the feld of Railway Interoperability; the Agency has identifed so far six intermediate
outcomes that it can actively influence through its portfolio OfTSIs, ERTMS , National rules,
and Registers services。
are essential components; which will lead tothe achievement
ofthe strategic statement. The already identifed intermediate outcomes are as follows:
1. ERTMS is fully implemented on rolling stock by all Railway Undertakings
2. ERTMS is fully implemented on railway infrastructure by all Infrastructure Managers
3.Allrailway rolling stock is TSI compliant by all RUs across the EU. (exc. TAP/TAF & OPE)
4.AIIrailway infrastructure is TSI compliant by all IMs across the EU
5. National rules (rolling stock & fxed installation) are harmonised across the EU
6.All relevant
railway-related data is shared in an open and transparent way so that it
is utilisable and useful for the sector
Ofcourse; this list will continue to evolve in the future to include additional intermediate
outcomes, as the Agency continues to pursue its full implementation of the intervention
logic.
Following the results ofthe MB workshop in June 2023 on SPD 2025-2027, where the Man-
agement Board expressed its desire for the Agency to propose more knowledge sharing
activities; such as training, and other dissemination activities;, the Agency will strengthen
its activities in this domain. Such activities Will be coordinated by the ERA Academy; being
the established knowledge sharing vehicle ofthe Agency. While being part of Strategic
Statement 7,the ERA Academy activities, by their nature, serve all strategic statements of
the Agency。
Authority tasks
The Agency Will also continue to deliver on its role as sole body responsible for issuing
multi-Member-State authorisations, certifcations, and approvals:. The Agency will contin-
Ue
performing its tasks in full partnership with the NSAs. In addition, the links between
authorisation, certifcations, and approvals bythe Agency and the supervision bythe NSAs
Wil be strengthened The Agency Will also continue to drive further the harmonisation
towards the Single European Railway Area, ensuring the path towards technical and oper-
ational interoperability. The advancement ofthe System Pillar and the Agency's inputs in
the matter will further support harmonisation.
The lessons learnt through the issuing Of VAs; ERTMS trackside approvals and from the
monitoring Of NoBos Will be used to capture continuous improvement opportunities for
the technical specifications and to the authorization procedures:. The experience in issuing
22
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
They

safety certifcates will be used to better steer the safety related policy making, so railway
safety will never be misused again as a barrier More specifcally; the work on NoBo moni-
toring Will be reinforced in 2025, with additional resources dedicated to this activity, in line
With the direction given in the Strengthening Plan.
Authority tasks however will face the highest pressure it has ever faced, with a surge ofappli-
cations for VAs with ERTMS retroftting components, as well as linked to DAC. Given the scarce
resources in the Agency Which have these skills and the competing need in the ERTMS stream
ofwork the Agencyfaces high risks ofunderachievement in the latter. More information can be
found under C5 (negative priorities):
TSIs & National Technical Rules
The Agency also intends to improve interoperability with, among others:
TSI development according to the new European Commission requests。
The ERA Change Control Management
The assessment of notifed National Technical Rules (and the
drafting ofTOin case
ofanegative assessment)
The monitoring of the development ofthe Ens complementing the TSIs
And the overall support to the European Commission, to the Notifed Bodies, and
tothe Member States, as perthe Agency's
regulation and other relevant legal text。
The stability of the TSIs, together with a successful cleaning up of the remaining national
rules are the foundation of seamless operations across Europe and for an increasing-
Iy effective authority function, reinforcing the added value of a European mindset in the
EU railway system。
Onthe 21st of August 2024,The Agency has received from the Commission the EC Request
for recommendations on the multi-annual TSI Revision framework. This request will be the
backbone forthe Agency work on the revision ofthe TSIs with 3 important recommenda-
tion milestones: end of 2026,end of 2028 and after 2030.It follows careful consideration
of the Commissions priorities, the Agency, the stakeholders as wellas the EU-Rail Joint
Undertaking and considers 3 main categories:
The items in the "Completing SERA" category focus on addressing barriers to inter-
operability, enhancing safety and increasing efficiency, both in terms of technical
and operational provisions. Another key objective is to achieve deeper harmoni-
sation oftechnical systems, engineering rules and operational rules. This is Vital to
ensure these do not create hidden divergences between national systems, and
also to ensure automation Of rail processes can target a single system rather than
many variants
thus supporting the vision of truly harmonized rail products for
the SERA. Additionally, actions are being introduced to improve the accessibility
of both railway infrastructure and vehicles for passengers; as well
as tO sUpport
workplace health and safety Of railway workers and to reduce the environmental
impact such as noise:
The majority of"Innovation uptake and future-proof rail" category topics are con-
nected to the foreseen outputs ofthe EU-RAILJU or contribute to the digitaliza-
tion/automation ofthe railway system to increase its efficiency and improve its at-
tractiveness for customers. Special attention is to be paid to the recommendations
to migration and implementation aspects regarding these innovative solutions。
The "Optimised regulation" category aims to improve the coherence; legal reada-
certainty, and applicability of the TSIs, as well as to improve and Wherever
possible; simplify the testing, assessment; certification and authorisation processes。
In addition to the listed items in this category, further emphasis should be put on the
scope and the structure Of TSIs to contribute to the streamlining ofthe technical frame-
Work without impeding the implementation deadlines of already existing legal provisions。
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
23
bility

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
In 2025, the Agency Will continue to work on the cleaning-up of national technicaland
safety rules, as Wellas those on fxed installation and ERTMS. This cleaning-up is an impor-
tant step towards delivering a truly harmonised EU rail system. The Agency will continue
to focus on the removal of redundant national rules (operational and technical) the har
monisation ofthe remaining rules, and the development of AMOCs。
National Safety Rules & TSI OPE
The Agency will also continue its efforts to harmonise operational rules and practices; with
the objective of reducing operational barriers for the SERA and improving the overall per-
formance ofthe railway system; taking into account the interfaces with other EU legis-
lation including ongoinglfuture developments: The Agency Will therefore in the medi-
um-term work on the following items:
1.TSIOPE revision & CRs management.
2.Continuous improvement OfTSI OPE Application Guide and of current AMOCS.
3
Drafting ofnew AMOCs, when and where applicable。
4.NSRs cleaning-up process 1.0 (transition to SRD)and 2.0 (TSIOPE 2023 requirements)
5. NSRs review process and its assessment framework
6
Support the Commission in managing Train Driver Directive related tasks
7. Ensure the coherence between the RID and the TSIs, taking into account the tech-
nological evolution。
8.To ensure the coherence between other EU legislation and the TSIOPE
Concerning the coordination oftransport of dangerous goods by rail the Agency will con-
tinue to deliver support and assistance to the EC, recognising Of course the supporting
essence ofthe Agency's role in the matter。
Digitalisation & interoperable data
The Agency acknowledges the strategic importance of data and digitalisation in support-
ing a sustainable development of railways in Europe as a competitive mode of transport
and taking a data centric approach, has the ambition to become a reference for facilitating
the multi-modal data exchange and queries; based on
a common
Ontology for railways。
The Agency has ambitious aims to exploit the potential of digitalization for its operational
data systems, including a full transformation of the existing registers to support future Al
and automation capabilities. The Interoperable Data Roadmap Will boost the performance
level of internal processes and willallow to have modern systems such as OSS, Registers;
etc。
fully functioning according to schedule and completely interoperable with commer-
cial software solutions currently adopted by the railway industry to support the operators
in their daily business. It willalso continue to carefully follow the challenges and mitigat-
ing measures associated to both IT security and cybersecurity.:
In 2025 the Agency will continue its work on a CCM process that will control the addition
ofnew National Specifc Parameters (NSPs) in relation to the Telematics TSIs. In parallel we
will seek to establish the complete list of current NSPs, use best efforts to start the clean-
upNalidation of current NSPs and propose a timeline for cleaning the list that matches the
resourcing and priorities ofthe Agency work progamme:
Forthe period 2025-2027, the Agency will still be a top player in ensuring the right frame-
work forthe data and information
exchange related to assets and services (includ-
ing ticketing data), based on linked data, universal data identifiers and more and better
data exchanged between operators and customers. This will ensure a seamless exchange
ofdata With other modes oftransport; thus allowing the customers to beneft from a com-
prehensive logistics chain orthe mobility-as-a-service, respectively。
While specifications for infrastructure description related data used in the register ofin-
frastructure (RINF), respectively for information exchange in telematics applications; were
24
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

developed for different purposes; they now appear to be inconsistent between one an-
otherin the context of their integration into the European Mobility Data Space (EMDS) for
Which the ERA Vocabulary has been setas building block for rail. Corresponding alignment
and
linking of rail data for infrastructure description constitutes both an internal and ex-
ternal
challenge for the Agency that Will be addressed through the Work of the Agency
on the review ofthe governance of location coding in the context ofthe review OfTSIs
on telematics applications and development ofthe RINF Regulation and associated RINF
application。
Moreover the Agency is a publisherin the open data portal, with 13 datasets published.
Currently, the Agency is committed to adopting an approach based on linked data main-
streaming Of this approach to other registers and databases in 2025. Once fully imple-
mented, this stream ofwork will be covered under strategic statement 2and 3
In addition, the Telematics TSI will provide the data communication requirements for the
transparent and efficient traffic management and train operations system ofthe future in-
cluding also () frst and last mile logistic segments involving intermodal actors (operators;
terminals) and (ii) linkage to other modes of transport (road, waterborne) This will also
contain the enhanced simple and smart tracking of trains; wagons and consignments。
The same TSI willalso include additional requirements for the setting up of Laas starting
from consignment order (intermodal compliant), train operation preparation and ending
in
well-predicted
efficient delivery of trains; wagons and consignments to the business
partners
Ofcourse, seamless operations also mean exchanging data, a process on Which the Agen-
Will continue to contribute by
facilitating the data exchange for, among various pUr-
poses, authorization, registration, and route compatibility checks, based on the linked data
approach. The Agency acknowledges the clear shared ambition to drive the development
ofthe digital agenda and in 2025 will implement in full the requirements. The Agency is
actively piloting the use of linked data
technology to deliver an ISS tool to support the
implementation of the CSM ASLP regulation. This required an extension Of the ERA On-
which was already published as a draft in 2024. Whilst the
funding to develop the
application layer has notyet been secured the Agency is optimistic that the pilot work will
offeran opportunity to use existing national systems as the User Interface:
ERTMS
Seven priorities have been identifed:
a) Future Railway Mobile Communication System (FRMCS): With the upcoming ob-
solescence Of GSM-R the Agency is currently working on this area, Which would
modernise the system from a 2G-based system to a 5G one. By 2027, FRMCS specif-
cations Will be prepared by the EECT RMR.
b) ETCS and ATO specifications: the Agency would aim at maintaining and improving
the overall ERTMS specifcations by drafting and reviewing the ETCS and ATO speci-
fcations within the EECT ETCS. The priorities of new functionalities within this work-
stream are defned within the EC-request for recommendations on the multi-annual
TSI Revision framework.
c) Cybersecurity: the Agency would Work towards integrating at least the minimum
technical requirements in CCS TSI, when appropriate:
Operational interoperability: the Agency will support this stream ofwork especially
through the update ofits generic ETCS handbook the development of operational
rules for ETCS SV3.0 functionality within the ERTMS OH group:
ERTMS engineering: the Agency intends to steer the harmonisation of engineering
rules by reviewing and publishing harmonised engineering rules。
ESC/RSC: develop and support activities to reduce the number of ESC/RSC-checks。
9) CCSTSl: the Agency plans on working on various aspects ofCCS TSL, through regular
dissemination, such as the ERTMS Conference; ad hoc support to CINEA, through
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
25
tology

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
the continued support provided to the European Commission on the matter The
CCSTSIshall be revised according to the scope and timeline as defned in the EC-re-
quest。
h) Support to the PAD-unit by delivering opinions by the ERTMS system authority on
the CCS TSI compliance of the ETCS On-Board products. These opinions reduce the
time and cost for certification and authorisation ofthe ETCS-part within the different
Vehicle types。
The Agency will also between 2025 and 2027 work on
contribution agreement to en-
hance capacity building on safety and interoperability in Greece. Through this stream of
work the Agency will:
Provide recommendations forthe governance and allocation ofstakeholders roles and
responsibilities ofthe Greek railway sector, according to the EU legal frameworkfor rail-
Way safety and interoperability;
Enhance the capacities of key stakeholders to ensure safety and implementation OfEU
law;
Provide support together with some NSAs for implementing the recommendations
from the 'assessment reportand recommendation for ERTMS in Greece (e9. the design-
ingofaroadmap for the implementation of ERTMS).
ERTMS however will face an incredibly high pressure due to a surge of applications for VAs with
ERTMS
retrofitting components. Given the scarce resources in the Agency which havethese skills
and the competing need in the ERTMS stream of work the Agency faces high risks ofundera-
chievement in the latter. More information can be found under C5 (negative priorities).
System Pillar
The programme 'Management of Innovation and long-term evolution ofthe Agency; in-
troduced in 2021, will continue to steer the research & innovation policy of the Agency
and its future development. It Willalso be in charge of coordinating the Agencys input to
the work on the System Pillar. This programme intends to
clearer defnition ofthe
EU target rail system through:
An EU rail architecture:
An alignment between the development of future legislation
TSIs, Standards)
the activities ofthe Europes RailJU.
progressive deployment ofthe solutions to reach the target system。
Agency to identify specifc areas for attention and communicate toJU。
Finally, the Agency Will continue to ensure technical assistance to the Commission; as
guardian of interoperability and safety, and as system authority for ERTMS & telematics。
This Will boost harmonisation of operations; subsystems; and components; leaving the
practical aspects to the industry, assuming an appropriate level of oversight: In parallel
the Agency Will continue to identify related research needs and assess mature innovation
products; with a clear potential for market uptake; in order to reflect them into the tech-
nical specifications。
In this context; the Agency will focus on exploring emerging needs such as:
Better coordination of traffic management EU-wide; including, but not limited to,
planning; capacity management; and emergency responses:
Increased and improved offer for passengers and freight in the railway sector
Improved operations through the adoption of automatic translation systems and
training for operators in their native language: This would enhance the railway Sys-
tems resilience to interoperability issues and increase cross-border traffc。
The objective is to make the railway system more resilient to interoperability issues and
increase the cross-border traffic:
26
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
bring

Outcome indicators
Harmonisation and reduction of Member-State specific National rules (both national
Safety rules and national technical rules) via a Single Rules Database:_
Numberofinternational passenger/freight trains at selected border stations
2
(interoperability reports)
Planned Vs real transfertimes at cross border points
ERTMS trackside deployment in the EU
5
Vehicles equipped with ERTMs in the EU
VAs for multi-member states issued by the Agency
SSC for multi-member states issued bythe Agency
Data is FAIR measured on a scale (numbers in KG)
Resource envelope
2025
2026
2027
FTEs
87.58
88.36
84.14
Budget ()
5,831,980
E5,095,610
E5,252,803
This numberincludes the POE and NSA costs for fees and charges activities on ERTMS TA and Vehicle authorisations。
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
27

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
The Agency is playing
pivotal role in supporting the transformation Of the European
B.2. Strategic statement 2 &3 -
transport system towards decarbonised, interoperable; and safe transport modes based
on multi-modal integration (Maas).
Rail will become the backbone
that supports an environmentally
The Agency has identifed for this Strategic Statement two intermediate outcomes; which
sustainable multimodal transport
Willsupport the achievement ofthe overarching statement. There are the following ones:
system and will be favoured as
1. TAP is implemented by all relevant railway actors (IMs, RUs, ticket vendors), it is actu-
transport mode by the new
ally used as the main channel of information exchange and the ticketing is integrat-
generation; rail traffic will become
ed in the multimodal environment with other transport modes
seamless and Maas (Mobility as
Service)and Laas (Logistic as a
2.TAFis implemented by all relevant railway actors (IMs, RUs, WKs, CTOs)and it is actu-
Service) will be ensured, including
ally used as the main channel of information exchange
multi-leg ticketing
Of course; TAF and TAP TSI will also be in scope for some intermediate outcomes already
identifed under strategic statement
Additional intermediate outcomes will be identi-
fied in the future to further implement the intervention logic within the Agency。
While no programme has been attributed to strategic statement 2 & 3, three important
Ones will be crucial contributors:
Railway operations
harmonisation (ERA1172, strategic statement
1): this
Dro-
gramme Will include the coordination ofthe transport of dangerous
byrail.
Interoperable data (ERA1226, strategic statement 1): this programme Will cover;
among others; the TAFTTAP TSIs, Which are particularly relevant in
multi-modal
context as
enable that integration in terms ofticketing and timetables Which
has been preventing the effective development of rail as the backbone ofamul-
ti-modaland international transport
Economic analysis and research (ERA1 188, strategic statement 6): it Will include the
delivery of support and assistance to the EC On rail and sustainability, with annual
topical reports
Outcomeindicators
The levelof implementation OfTAF and TAP TSLas monitored through the annual
'Safety and Interoperability Progress Report
Evolution in share of rail (both passenger and freight) in the EU's transport market
2
compared to air road or maritime transport
GHG emission from rail compared with other transport modes (shares %E
Noise-TSI-compliant freight Wagons
Resource
envelope ()
2025
2026
2027
FTEs
Budget
E0
E0
E0
Starting 2025 the Agency will implement
Te
portfolio structure based on 22 programmes instead of 69 projects
and services in order to streamline the portfolio administration and to have
more meaningful and efficient
deployment of budgetand FTEs, in line with the actual areas Ofwork. In the specifc case of statements 2&3 the
projects and services listed before under this statement will become part of bigger programmes listed under strate-
gic statement
and 6. These programmes will however continue to contribute to the strategic statements 2&3.
28
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
goods
they

8.3. Strategic statement 4 -
Rail will be an increasingly safe and
Secure mode oftransport forits
users and workers
CSMASLP
Delivering SSC
STARS
Monitoring NSANOBO & NIB
Capacity Building
peerreview
Sustainable Safety Management
On
Safetyand
In the field of Railway Safety, the Agency has identifed 3 categories of intermediate out-
comes that it can actively influence through its portfolio of safety related programmes
and that are essential pre-conditions to achieve the strategic statement 4. The identifed
intermediate outcomes are as follows:
1.AlIrailway operators
IM, RUECM
understand and accept their responsibility and
actively implement an SMS to control the risks of operational activities;
2.An increased performance ofand trust in the different safety related control levels in
the system
ERA, MS, NSA, ASBO, ECM CB, accreditation, recognition, NIB;
3.
Safety and safety managementlperformance related data is shared in an open and
transparent way;
Up until now the Agency has invested most ofits efforts in building knowledge and reg-
ulating, While not sufficiently supporting the railway sector in the actual implementation
Of the legislative framework. The following years of the Agencys work programme will
focus more on the actual implementation by supporting the sector through knowledge
sharing, by better understanding the issues the sector is facing When implementing the
legislative framework by reinforcing the expected outcome where possible and enforcing
it Where necessary. Within this framework of intermediate outcomes and interventions for
statement 4the Agency will continue to focus on:
Supporting Member States in developing, adopting and repealing national legis-
lation and strengthening NSAs' and NIBs' capacity, in line with principles and legal
acts promoted by the EU. (sharing knowledge/ monitoring/ reinforcing)
2
Enhancing railway safety through positive Safety culture and integration of
human and
organisational factors and on the harmonisation of the safety
approach;, partly through SSC applications. (sharing knowledge/ monitoring/
reinforcing)
3
Monitoring of NSAs and the follow-up Of issues emerged during the 1stand the
2nd cycle ofaudits (monitoring /reinforcing):
Learning lessons through the issuing Of SSCs, the monitoring Of NSAs, the review
Of NIB accident investigation reports and the information exchanged during
NSAand NIB meetings and meetings organised with the AsBos, this will be used to
continuously improve the common safety methods, as Wellas the safety certifica-
tion procedures (knowledge building/ sharing knowledge
monitoring)
5
Strengthening the culture Of risk management to identify risks and mitigating
measures but also opportunities to improve the efficiency of operations preserving
the safety level. This shall cover well-known operational scenarios; including inter-
faces with other transport modes; and the adoption of emerging technology and
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
29

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
related relevant risks
cyber security, etc ). (knowledge building/ sharing knowl-
edge)
More specifically; this strategic statement will be fed by the activities Of various
Dro-
grammes Concerning the Common Safety Methods on Assessment of Safety Level
and Safety Performance (CSM ASLP) programme; it Will work towards the start Of the
implementation Of CSM through the Information Sharing System, With the caveat ofthe
legal adoption and sufficient budget allocation. Should these criteria be met, a full imple-
mentation of the ISS should be possible in the future. Furthermore; this programme will
also implementJNS procedures and ensure its functioning:
When it comes to the programme on Sustainable Safety Management the Agency
Will continue its stakeholder engagement through active involvement of experts; such
as Entities in Charge of Maintenance (ECM), HOF professionals, Assessment Bodies (AsBo)
Safety/risk experts in the feld of Transport of Dangerous Goods (TDG), SMS experts and
potentially others, in order to facilitate ongoing discussions and exchanges of best prac-
tices.It will continue the preparatory work (CSM Review vision document) to support the
European Commission and help facilitate the proposal for a mandate to be putin place to
allow for an Agency Recommendation for the review ofthe current set of CSMs and the
development ofa new text on competence management. The Agency willalso organise
andlor contribute to stakeholder fora and therefore discuss emerging challenges and fnd
collaborative solutions, as in the case of the guide under CSM REA for holistic cross wind
riskassessment and related risk control measures. In addition, the programme Will look at
developing specific online environments, supporting communication and collaboration,
together with the preparation Of tools, guidance material, and educational resources on
safetyareas, such as HOF risk management; (systemic) safety enhancement, and safety
management principles。
Regarding monitoring, the third cycle OfNSA monitoring Will start in 2025, With a poten-
tial fOCUs on
prioritisation and implementation of actions by NSAs. The details and scope
ofthe third cycle will be discussed and adopted in November 2024 by the Management
Board. In terms Of NoBo monitoring, the Agency aims to complete the monitoring of
all NoBos by 2026. Concerning the peer-review ofthe NIBs, the Agency will fnalise the
current
until the end of 2025 and will contribute to the defnition ofthe 2nd
Of
the Peer review。
As mentioned above; the Agency Will also continue to disseminate on railway safety
islation. Through its STARS programme and in collaboration with the ERA Academy; the
Agency Willestablish a portfolio oftraining, qualifcations, and other appropriate activities
adapted to the needs identifed in the sector. It will also develop and implement process-
es for qualifying trainers; training, and support activities. The programme Willalso design
content for safety events in line with the stakeholder needs and interest to contribute to
develop safety culture across Europe: Finally; the programme will provide stakeholders
with the appropriate tools to foster Safety culture by means of identification of good prac-
tices。
Improving the structure; quality, and availability Of safety relevant data While making
Sure it is shared in an open and transparent way among all railway actors. (knowledge
building/ monitoring)。
30
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
(e.9.
key =
Cycle
Cycle 
leg-

Outcomeindicator
Number of SSC's issued with reduced validity period/ overall number of certifcates
issued
2
Number ofnegative decisions of SSCs
Percentage of NSA's audited with at least
defciency (focused on defciencies still
open from the 1st cycle) . Note: this is a rolling indicator
NSA Monitoring: number of defciencies still open (follow-up ofthe
1st and Znd
Cycle) vs number of defciencies ofthe
and 2nd cycle (rolling indicator) Note: this is
rolling indicator
Numberof peer reviewed NIB's
Numberof volunteering NIBs to participate in the NIB peer review / total number of
NIB's (on a yearly basis)
Resource envelope
2025
2026
2027
FTEs
37.15
36.34
35.35
Budget (4)
E1,528,116
E1,519,627
1,538,166
This numberincludes the POE and NSA costs for fees and charges activities on SSC.
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
31

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
The Agency is currently reviewing the strategic statement 5, especially as no programme
8.4. Strategic statement 5
has been identifed yet for the next three years. It will nonetheless continue to support the
Unions interest upon request ofthe Commission and in line with the Agency's mandate
Rail will be resilient and agile
and
taking into consideration the crisis communication stream ofwork。
in
responding to emergency
Situations
Outcomeindicators
Under development
Resource envelope
2025
2026
2027
FTES
Budget
E0
E0
E0
32
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

The Agency Will endeavour to make sure that the rules and system specifcations are
smart; proportionate and contribute to the competitiveness Of the industry: It Will also
B.5. Strategic statement 6
make sure that the SSC, VA, and ERTMS TA processes are cost and time effcient, fostering
the entrance ofnew operators in the market.
Rail will become increasingly
economically competitive as a
As presented in previous strategic statements; the Agency Will use its analytical expertise
modeand as a sector
Within its remit in order to deliver objective and credible evidence for decision-making
as Wellas
identify and monitor rail research activities to support technical progress ofthe
Single European Railway Area. The programme on Economic Analysis and Research
Will focus during 2025-2027 on the following elements:
Improved data availability and quality and facilitated access for stakeholderslin-
dustry;
Enhanced understanding of the As-Is situation through an extended scope of
monitoring ofand building knowledge on the railway system, as wellas targeted
studies of strategic importance;
Inefficiencies and bottlenecks in the European railway system are understood,
mapped,and measured;
Strengthened IA practice through creation and maintenance Of standardised in-
puts for economic analysis and greater quantification in IAs;
Ex-post evaluations are taken into account and result in better regulation and pol-
icies;
J & sector are involved in
delivering innovative solutions; ERA serving as the
champion of
bridge for safety & interoperability aspects
The Agency aims at evaluating the economic impact ofthe vehicle authorisation
and issuing of single safety certifcate processes on the railway sector; the impact of
the TSIsasa
package; ofmarket opening and competition and of modular interchange-
ability in the ERTMS system specifcations. The Agency will assess interoperability and
safety improvements from a cost-effectiveness perspective, also considering eff-
ciency and effectiveness ofthe Agency's internal processes. The results ofthe assess-
ments will be used to propose recommendations for improving the legal texts; as Wellas
any non-regulatory instruments; in the spirit ofthe Better Regulation principles。
In addition; the Management Board, NSA and NRB networks will be regularly informed
about the return of experience, lessons learnt and priorities for the IA practice。
Outcome indicators
Evolution in rail traffic in absolute terms
Proportion ofrail Vs road and air transport for passenger and freight rail in the EU
3
Numberof pax-km per passengertrain-km
Number oftonne-km perfreight train-km
5
Average ERTMS costs (trackside and on-board)
Average time for placing vehicles on the market
Resource envelope
2025
2026
2027
FTEs
5.39
5.41
5.41
Budget
E69,300
E69,300
E71,910
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
33

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
B.6. Strategic Statement7
The EU will become the global
reference for rail and ERA
authorisations Will be globally
recognised
Skateholder Relations, Academy & Communications
International Relations
One ofthe objectives ofthe Agency is to become a global reference in the railway domain
for technical matters and build its reputation of a solid, resilient; and trustworthy organ-
ization. To achieve that; the Agency will work on multiple fronts. It will support the ECin
designing, implementing,and monitoring the EU transport foreign policy The Agency will
also contribute to international standardization by strengthening its cooperation with
European and international standardization organizations. The Agency will also
prepare dissemination contents and organise training sessions and other means of shar-
ing the precious knowledge it has gathered. Furthermore; the Agency Will focus on the
EC priorities in terms oftechnicaland geographical areas and willalso provide the
requested analyses and support。
Focussing on training and dissemination; in 2025-2027, the Agency will continue
t0
strengthen its dissemination capabilities and tools; reflecting there the results of the MB
Workshop on SPD 2025-2027.In addition, the Agency Will propose
range of webinars
on a Variety of topics underthe expertise ofthe Agency and will continue to organise EU-
wide railway events. The Stakeholder Relations, Academy & Communication programme
willsupportthese goals, and will focus on the following priorities forthe 2025-2027 period:
Training
Deliver training and other similar activities concerning the application and
nation of railway Safety and interoperability legislation and related products ofthe
Agency such as registers; implementation guides and recommendations;
Facilitate access to education all over Europe and promote the
development of
more dedicated railway related training both by ERA and externally;
Develop-
a structured
railway related education webpage and promote and facilitate
ERA-and external educational activities;
Facilitate the e-learning platform, Which would cover additional topics on safetyand
interoperability by 2028;
Facilitate the development and implementation of processes for providing an ERA
evaluation Ofexternal trainers and trainings:
Events
Deliver the ERA events, as proposed in the relevant Communication and Dissemi-
nation plan;
Media
Increase followers on X, Linkedln, and YouTube over time to reach a wider audience;
Increase the coverof ERA activities in news media.
Reputation management
Improve the Agency corporate image through a large use of the publication
Office;
Enhance preparedness and establish channels to respond to potential crises
efficiently。
34
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
expla-

Internal Communication
Enhanced awareness of ERA activities within the Agency, including but not limited
to General Assemblies, internal news, Management decisions communication;
Rail Stakeholder engagement
Organise the network meetings for NSAs, NIBs, and NRBs With the aim to support
exchanges amongst the involved parties, ERA, and the EC;
Foster in these groups the exchange of information relating to railway Safety and
interoperability;
Promote good practices in relevant fora;
Maintain the cooperation with other EU Transport Agencies with the aim ofsharing
Ofknowledge and adopting similar approaches for similar issues。
Furthermore; the Agency will also support the European Commission on its internation-
portfolio. In December 2023, the Agency and the European Commissions Directorate
General DG NEAR signed a three-year contract "EU support on transposition and imple-
mentation Of the EU railway acquis by the European Union Agency for Railways" This
contract will be implemented from 2024 to 2026 (included). The contract willallow the
Agencyto continue its efforts supporting the benefciaries ofthe Western Balkans and Tur-
kiye under the European Unions instrument for pre-accession assistance (IPA). The Work
Program comprises the cooperation with the Transport Community, based in Belgrade:
Beneficiaries are the EU candidate and potential candidate countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Kosovo (This designation is without prejudice to positions on status and is in
line with UNSCR
1244and the ICJ opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence),
Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia and Tuirkiye:
The Agency Will also continue international collaboration upon request of the Commis-
sionand in line with the EU priorities and the Agency's mandate, in the Unions neighbour-
hood policy areas and beyond.It will through its International Relations programme focus
onthe
following actions for 2025-2027,in line with the Agency's remit:
Develop an update of Annex XILof SPD "Strategy for cooperation with third coun-
tries and/orinternational
organisations" in line with the Agency's Regulation Article
44(3).
Organise workshops and deliver support on the implementation ofthe EU railway
legislation;
Communicate and disseminate to relevant stakeholders on the EU framework of
railway law and the development of standards and guidance;
Engage in training and other appropriate activities concerning the application and
explanation ofrailway Safety and interoperability legislation and related products of
the Agency such as registers; implementation guides and recommendations;
Organise meetings ofthe Platform of Rail Regulatory Bodies;
Coordination with OTIF Permanent Secretariat ofthe Transport Community Ukraini-
an
ministry in charge ofrailways and other partners underthe signed Administrative
Arrangements, as wellas other bilateral and multilateral contacts in support Of EU
policies and priorities;
Facilitate ad-hoc participation as observer in the NIB- and NSA Networks, ifagreed
by these Networks, with the aim to foster the exchange of information on railway
Safety and interoperability, and the promotion of best practices:
Finally, in addition to the pledges above, the Agency Will continue its international collab-
oration on an ad-hoc basis, upon request ofthe Commission and in line with the Agency's
mandate in the Unions neighbouring policy areas.
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
35

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Outcomeindicator 
Number of participants in ERA training sessions and other dissemination events
2
Number of participants in the Platform of Rail Regulatory Bodies
Numberof meetings
events
organised or supported by ERA
Adoption of updated Annex XILof SPD "Strategy for cooperation with third countries
andlor international organisations" reflecting EU Strategic Agenda and EC priorities
2024-2029, enlargement process of EU, assistance to Ukraine, activities ofthe Global
Gateway; relevant regional and sectoral EU strategies
Resource envelope
2025
2026
2027
FTES
16.31
16.28
16.28
Budget
E918,897
1,099,211
E1,166,301
36
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

B.7. Strategic statement 8
Legal support; accounting
The Agency will ensure an effective
Corporate governance
& procurement
and effcient governance ofits
portfolio of activities in order to
In orderto achieve the strategic statement 8, the Agency has identifed fve intermediate
offer the best value for money to
outcomes that it will actively work towards in the following years through the related
citizensand business in the EU
portfolio of programmes:
1. Staff understand the mission and vision ofthe Agency, internalise it and have the
flexibility, the ownership/ autonomy with their activities, and a clear mutual under-
standing oftheir roles and responsibilities to actively contribute to the strategic di-
rection ofthe Agency
2.The Agency has
sound and agile governance framework Whose processes and
administration favour clarity, efficiency and decision making at the right level
3. The SPD process steers the Agency' strategy and multi-annual work programme de-
Velopment in an integrated, evidence-based, and coordinated
manner as Wellas
the monitoring of its effectiveness. This can be achieved through interfacing With
the internal stakeholders owning the strategies and the external stakeholders (EC;
EB strategic calendar etc).
4.SPDis the single reference (for internal and external stakeholders) forall critical tac-
tical information providing the overarching view on the implementation ofthe pro-
grammes。
5.The Agency is
learning, ethical, legally complying organisation where the deci-
sion-making, the strong fnancial control, the monitoring and reporting processes
give the assurance of best value for money:
The other intermediate outcomes Will be achieved also through the optimization of the
ERA planning, monitoring and reporting capabilities, to enhance the Agencys pro-
gramme management framework together with the Single Programming Documentand
the Consolidated Annual Activity Report. This will lead to an allocation of resources based
onimpactand intended outcome; fostering the added value created forthe railway sector
and an overall better performance of the Agency. An Action Plan for the
Strengthening
Plan 2023-2027 is put in place; in close link to the SPD implementation and monitoring:
With the Agencys organisational culture change initiative 'Better together at ERA; the
Agency Will continue to invest resources and time to boost and refne the work environ-
ment and cooperation between staff members
The Agency Will also continue to ensure the legal compliance of its activities; outputs;
and deliverables with the
applicable legal framework. It Will also guarantee the compli-
ance Ofall procurement processes;, through transparent processes; regular monitoring;
and dissemination of knowledge across the Agency:
Furthermore, the important work on Women in transport which should lead to the
strengthening of womens employment and equal opportunities for women and men in
the transport sector will be pursued. Indeed, many studies have shown that gender parity
in the workforce increases the productivity and the cohesion of staff, as wellas innovation.
Outcomeindicators
Budget discipline (% of deviation of strategic statement spending compared with
the original allocated envelope)
Resource envelope
2025
2026
2027
FTEs
23.09
22.92
22.12
Budget
E165,000
E165,000
E165,000
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
37

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
8.8. Strategic statement 9
Facility
ICT
Human Resources
management
The Agency willensure a
performant working environment;
based on high-quality motivated
Clause 4ofthe ERA Policy states that "People are our most valuable resource" Coherently;
human resources and a
the Agency will implement the new HR strategy 2023-2027, offering clearand transparent
collaborative behaviour
career paths to staff members, allocate enough resources to make sure that good perfor-
mance and success stories are adequately rewarded,and that skills and competencies are
appropriate forthe Agency mission and kept up to date. Internal roles are not only defned
but also accompanied by a proper competency management system and communicated
externally so that interfaces are clear to the stakeholders. The Agency also acknowledges
the added value of diversity by implementing solutions to improve the gender balance in
management and operational roles and to widen the number of nationalities employed。
The Agency Will continue further digitalising the HR processes;, using to the best extent
possible European Commission tools, such as SYSPER and MIPS.
Regarding the IT systems and infrastructure; the Agency aims at moving from digital skills
ofindividuals to
more
global digital culture. Indeed, while technology supports the
achievement of various ERA objectives, the IT programmes sees technologyas an enabler
to achieve a"digital as default" value. Of course; this can only be achieved with the support
Ofa strong IT security management; information security, and cybersecurity rules to pro-
tect the Agency and its digital assets against cyberthreats。
In orderto achieve these goals; the IT programme will continuously optimise its processes;
streamline; and automate its workflows to the largest extent possible; While using and pro-
posing digital technologies that have the potential to increase productivity and efficiency
throughout the Agency. An IT strategy will support these objectives and be followed as
part ofthe ERA Strategic Calendar。
As perthe
Facility Management Programme, it Will continue to ensure that the premises
currently hosting the headquarters are supporting the business needs; considering the
aging of the building, as wellas the technical installations. It
therefore continue to
manage and provide specific maintenance through a cycle agreed with the landlord, Va-
lenciennes Metropole. It will also pursue and implement cost-efficient measures to man-
age the
building, aiming at reducing the environmental impact of the Agency, including
but not limited to improving recycling practices, reducing energy and water consump-
tion, and monitoring the quality Of services provided by FWC contracts suppliers。
Finally; the Agency has set up a Task Force to prepare its new
building in Valenciennes. The
deliverables ofthis work will be reported against in the programme ERA1159.
Outcomeindicators
Staff satisfaction (evaluated through the Staff Engagement Survey or own survey
With the same scope and questions)
Highly trained staff
(checked through dimensions training performance such as
the evolution Of hours recorded on training in MS Project; training budget; number
OfPITrequests)
3
HR strategy action plan progress
Overtime (% worked above the 40 hours/week on a monthly basis, over
1096
Cloud migration
infrastructure migrated to the cloud
ICTstrategy action plan progress
Resource permitting
checked through dimensions training performance such as the evolution of
recorded on training in MS
Project, training budget; number of PITrequests
38
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
WilI
hOUrs

Resource envelope
2025
2026
2027
FTEs
26.43
26.43
26.41
Budget (7)
E3,722,000
E4,272,000
E3,672,000
In the table below; the Agency programmes are mapped against their main strategic
statements and the statements to Which
contribute_
Statement
Code
Programmename
Statement1
Statement4
Statement 6
Statement7
Statement 8
Statement 9
283
[RA1221
Authority tasks support
Main
Contributing
[RA3300
DeliveringVA
Main
ERA34O0
Delivering TA
Main
[RA1218
Manage ERTMS long term evolution
Main
Rolling stock and fxed installations
[RA1175
Main
Contributing
harmonisation
[RA1172
Railway aperations harmonisation
Main
Contributing
[RA1226
Interoperable data
Main
Contributing
Contributing
ERA1240
System Pillar
Main
[RA3200
Delivering SSC
Nain
[RA1219
CSM-ASLP
Main
[RA1167
Sustainable safety management
Main
ERA1249
STARS
Main
[RA1253
Capacity building on Safety & Interoperability
Nain
[RA1224
Monitoring NSAINOBo & NIB peer review
Contributing
Main
[RA1188
Economic analysis and research
Contributing
Contributing
Main
Stakeholder Relations, Academy &
[RA1145
Main
Contributing
Communication
ERA1147
International Relations
Main
[RA1156
Corporate governance
Contributing
Main
ERA1159
Legal support; accounting & procurement
Contributing
Main
Contributing
[RA1201
ICT
Main
ERA1202
Facility Management & New building
Main
&1207
[RA1203
Human Resources
Main
This includes T2,T4.2,and relevant sections OfT3, T4.3
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
39
they

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
These programmes are represented hereunder according to the FTE allocation for the year 2025.
Ststl
Stst4
Ststg
Stst8
Monitoring NSAINOBo &
JCT
NIB peer review
Delivering VA
Interoperable data
Corporate governance
Facility
Rolling stockand fxed
Human
Management
Legal support; accounting
installations
Sustainable
Resources
& procurement
harmonisation
New bulding
Safety
Delivering SSC
Management
Stst7
Stst6
System
Pillar
Manage ERTMS
Railway
STARS
Economic
term
operation
Delivering
Stakeholder Relations; 
Internationall
analysisand
Authority Tasks Support
eVolution
Iharmonisation
TA
CSMASLP
Capacity。
Academy & Communication
Relations
research
Ststl
Stst4
Stst6
Stst7
Stst8
Ststg
40
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
long

C。 Humanand fnancial resources
outlook forthe years
2025-2027
C.1. Overview of the past and current situation
C.1.1. Staff population overview 2023-2025
Table 1 - Human resources 2023-2025 (8)
2023
2024
2025
Authorised
Staff
Human resources
under the EU
populationat
Authorised
Requested
Budget
31/12/2023
Temporary Agents
TA)
166
163
166
166
Contract Agents (CA)
36
34
36 (10)
36
Seconded National
4(1)
Experts (SNE)
Total staff
206
199
206
206
External staff fnanced
2(12)
from agreements
Structural service
providers
Complete tables are providedin Annex IV: Human Resources 2025-2027
quantitative &
Annex I: Human Resources 2025-2027
quantitative。
C.1.2。
Revenues 2023-2025
Table 2 - Revenues 2023-2025
Financial resources
Revenues
2023
2024
2025
(EUR)
Budget
Authorised
Requested
1 . Fees and
charges
10,312,858
11,913,156
14,052,983
2.EU contribution
27,418,274
28,645,912
29,733,355
3.Third countries
Revenues
801,315
1,022,594
812,104
contribution (= EFTA)
4+5.+6+7.Other
general revenues
Total
38,532,447
41,581,662
44,598,442
Complete tables are providedin AnexW
Financial resources。
Expressed in terms ofnumber of posts (headcounts), except for "External staff fnanced from agreements" where FTE
is used to ensure compliance with Table 17 - Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant, contribu-
tion Or service-level agreements in Annex IV。
Ofwhich 28 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 8 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 0 assigned to Fees and charges
There is an ongoing amendment ofthe System Pillar grant which should be fnalised by 042024.
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
41

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
C.1.3. Expenditures 2023-2025
Table 3
Expenditure 2023-2025
Financial resources
Expenditure
2023
2024
2025
(EUR)
Budget
Authorised
Requested
Title
Staff expenditure
23,387,602
22,654,387
23,881,904
Title 2
Infrastructure and
2,096,800
2,146,913
2,207,600
operating expenditure
Title 3
Operational
Expenditure
2,735,187
4,867.206
4,455,955
expenditure
Total EU contribution
28,219,589
29,668,506
30,545,459
(Titles
十2+3)
Total Fees and charges
10,312,858
11,913,156
14,052,983
Total
38,532,447
41,581,662
44,598,442
Complete tables are providedin Anpex
Financial resources。
The Agency Will need to constantly monitor the budget allocation for 2025. Several pre-
cautions have been taken into account; which generate pressure on the budget planning:
C2。
Outlook for the years 2025
2027
C.2.1.
Growth of existing tasks
In 2025 following the endorsement of the Strengthening Plan and the allocation of 12
additional TAs to the Agency to implement it the Agency Will dedicate these resources to
thefollowing priority domains; in line with the Strengthening Action Plan (SAP) 2023-2027:
a)
Authority tasks
b)
NSA monitoring
NoBo Monitoring
ERTMS and radio communication evolution
e)
TSIs
f)
The cleaning of national rules (technical, operational and safety rules)
9)
CSMASLP
h)
Digitalisation ofthe Agency's registers
42
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

C.3. Resource programming for the years 2025
2027
C.3.1.
Financialresources
Table 4 - Financial resources
Outlook 2025-2027
Financial resources
2025
2026
2027
(EUR)
Requested
Planned 
Planned 
Fees and charges
14,052,983
14,225,918
14,441,368
2. EU contribution
29,733,355
30,810,874
31,092,804
3.Third countries
Revenues
812,104
842,052
849,888
contribution (= EFTA)
4
+5.
+6+7.Other
generalrevenues
Total
44,598,442
45,878,844
46,384,060
Title
Staff expenditure
23,881,904
24,845,056
25,467,095
Title 2
Infrastructure and
2,207,600
2,477,600
2,157,600
operating expenditure
Title 3
Operational
Expenditure
4,455,955
4,330,270
4,317.997
expenditure
Total EU contribution
30,545,459
31,652,926
31,942,692
(Titles
+2+3)
Total Fees and charges
14,052,983
14,225,918
14,441,368
Total
44,598,442
45,878,844
46,384,060
Complete tables are providedin Annex Il
Financial resources。
C.3.2. Human resources
Table 5 - Human resources
Outlook 2025-2027 (33)
2025
2026
2027
Human resources
Requested
ERA estimates
ERA estimates
Temporary Agents (TA)
166
162(14)
160 (15)
Contract Agents (CA)
36
36
36
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
Total staff
206
202
200
External staff fnanced from
2(16)
0.5(1)
pm。
agreements
Structural service providers
Dm
Complete tables are providedin Annex I; Human Resources 2025-2027
quantitative
Annex
IV: Human Resources 2025-2027
quantitative
C.4. Strategy for achieving effciency gains
The Agency is committed to continuously improving its functioning, streamlining its pro-
cesses; optimising the engagement of its staff, and allowing for the reallocation of re-
Sources to the most important priorities. In the course of 2021, the Agency worked quite
intensively on effciency gains. This Work progressed until the end of 2021 and led to the
drafting ofthe Strengthening Plan , fnalised, and endorsed by the Management Board at
the beginning of 2022. The purpose of the Strengthening Plan is to make the strongest
possible case in order to
strengthen the Agency With resources matching the levelof
ambition necessary for achieving the important EC policy objectives for rail in an effective
Expressed in terms ofnumber of posts (headcounts), except for "External staff fnanced from agreements" where
FTEis used to ensure compliance with Table10
Additional EU funding:grant contributionand service-levelagree
ments in Annex IV
As perin the SAP foreseen FTE evolution。
Ibid
There is an ongoing amendment ofthe System Pillar grant, which should be fnalised by 042024.
Ibid
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
43

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
and efficient manner, and benefit from high levels of ambition and efficiency within ERA's
structure and methods。
With the document serving as a basis for the internal EC budget negotiations in 2022, the
Agency received a proposed increase of 12 TAs in 2022. While the additional TA allocation
is lower compared to the request from the Strengthening Plan (12 TAs proposed out ofthe
22 TAs requested), it can offer a good basis for the Agency to proceed with the implemen-
tation ofthe Strengthening Plan。
Following the adoption ofthe aforementioned plan; the Agency prepared the Strength-
ening Action Plan (SAP) 2023-2027, which details the actions that will be carried out within
the next fve years to strengthen the Agencys efficiency:. The SAP 2023-2027 is organised
along the following components/objectives:
31
Drivean
optimal resourcing ofthe following policy priority areas, matched by pro-
portional outputs and outcomes, including effciency gains:
NSAand NoBo monitoring;
ERTMS and radio communication evolution;
TSIrelated Work;
Clean-up ofnational rules;
CSMASLP;
Digitalisation ofthe Agency's registers。
b)
Maintain proper resourcing and further efficiency gains for the authority tasks;
Ensure a reduction in the Agency s administrative FTE allocation While maintaining
regularity and legality. This will be possible thanks no but not limited to:
A workload analysis;
The Leaning of processes;
training programme to facilitate the transition and provide the required
technical skills to staff moving from administrative tasks to operational ones。
Ensure the overall projected FTE evolution by 2027 (18);
Ensure effective and effcient budget management (planning and execution),ap-
propriate risk management。
In orderto ensure active involvement from allunits across the agency and to monitor the
implementation of the SAP an internal task force has been set up in 2023. This task force
ensures
optimal communication across the Agency on the SAP and its milestones, as well
as the implementation of key milestones. Finally, the Strengthening Action Plan has been
added to the Strategic Calendar ofthe Executive Board of the Agency. A rapporteur has
been appointed and will support guide; and monitor the implementation until the end
ofthe planin 2027.
C.5. Negative priorities
decrease of existing tasks
C.5.1.
Paused activities forthe year 2025
NSA Annual Performance review
Review OfNIB accident investigation reports
C.5.2. Stretched and targeted outputs for the year 2025
The Agency has been working on the Common Safety Methods on the assessment
Of Safety Level and Safety Performance for several years, following its mandate. It
also is one ofthe priorities ofthe Strengthening Action Plan . However, an informa-
tion sharing system is needed to prevent future accidents and improve Safety as a
-4TAs in 2026and-2TAsin 2027
44
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

whole. The Agency does currently not have sufficient budget to create such tool。
The Agency has therefore developed a document with the resources required to
develop and implement such tool, along With
timeline and the stages of
plementation. The Information
Sharing System (ISS) would require an estimated
2,375,000 EUR budget and a totalof 8 FTEs。
The Agency will continue to work intensely on its NSA monitoring activities, as it is
one ofthe policy priorities highlighted in the Strengthening Action Plan . However
there is
need to develop;
together with Member States;
3 new
Priority Coun-
tries Programme (PCP) at EU level with
broader approach including more rail-
way stakeholders such as Member States, NSAINIB, RUs , IMs, AsBo, NoBo , Notifying
Authorities; National Accreditation Bodies and other checking bodies; and fnally
other operational stakeholders such as ECM,and wagon keepers. The PCP has the
potential to provide a more holistic picture of railway safety and interoperability in
the Member State, and to bring further changes to improve safety across the EU。
In orderto deliverthis new initiative, the Agency would need an additional 50,000
EUR peryear
with 3 FTES。
C.5.3.
Growth of activities at risk of underdelivery
In 2025, the Agency anticipates
another surge ofapplications; With the highest
figures ever recorded for VAs and SSCs since the start of the implementation of
the 4th Railway
Package Technical Pillar. The Agency's resources have already been
stretched to the maximum oftheir capacity in 2024 to cope with the increase of
F&C activities and there is unfortunately no more room. This issue is also worsened
by the fact that only
handful of staff have the skills to tackle specific VA with
ERTMS retrofitting components. Therefore, as the Agency will always prioritise the
delivery of authority activities, there is a critical risk that the ERTMS objectives for
2025 WilI not be achieved due to this intense pressure. Given the expected high
workload linked to the ERTMS retroftting, the Agency might even not even be
able to meet its legal deadlines requirements in this feld in 2025. Diffcult deci-
sions may have to be taken in 2025 by the Agency if the situation is not resolved:
The Agency will continue its bilateral discussions With the European Commission
to assess how to best proceed to tackle this issue.
The Agency Willalso face resource pressure related to the new cybersecurity reg-
ulations (EU 2023/2841 ) which entered into force on January 7,2024.The required
efforts to comply with this legal act are estimated at the moment by the Agency at
E150,000 peryearand 2,3 FTEs. Given the cap on the human resources atthe Agen-
CY;and that no additional resources were granted for these activities; the Agency
endeaVour to
perform as wellas possible given the current circumstances。
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
45
im-
along
yet
will

川。
Annual Work
programme 2025
N
Nohtehstaigel
L
ddhlen
 Beller

A。
Executive summary
The Annual Work Programme for 2025 details all the programmes Which Will be carried
out to contribute to the Agency's goals in the year. The structure ofthe Work Programme
has been organised against desired long-term outcomes, implementing therefore an ef-
fective multi-annual work programme with developed objectives, as wellas the interven-
tion logic。
The annual work programme 2025 is aligned with the priorities listed in the Agency's
Strengthening Plan and the corresponding implementing document (SAP 2023-2027),
Which represents an anchor for the planning in SPD 2025 and the subsequent ones。
The Work programme also now reflects the new structures at the Agency With 22 pro-
grammes; which will be implemented as of January 1,2025.
The Agency's efforts in 2025 are particularly focused on:
Technical and operational barriers: The Agency will work towards the reduc-
tion oftechnical and operations barriers within the rail market through, among
others; the amendment of TSIs to be aligned with the technical innovations; har-
monisation ofnational rules among MSs, continuous NoBo monitoring, the deliv-
ery Of 4r Railway package activities (SSC, ERTMS TA, VA), and the deployment of
ERTMS.
Safety: The Agency will strengthen safety on rail through the development of
safety culture; the monitoring Of National Safety Authority, the Common Safe-
ty Methods on Assessment of Safety Level and Safety Performance (within the
boundaries linked to the resource constraints for the information sharing system),
and other relevant programmes
Data developments and ticketing: The Agency will continue to foster develop-
ments in the feld of Linked data, as well as development under the TAP/TAF TSI.
The Agency will continue its work on databases and registers optimisation
Communication and dissemination: The Agency will increase communicating
and disseminating relevant information and knowledge to its stakeholders, as well
a5
organising events and showcase interesting projects and developments within
the rail sector。
Good governance: The Agency Will strive for governance excellence and eff-
ciency in allofits activities and will continue its efforts for improving budget exe-
cution rates and overall compliance and performance:
To best illustrate the alignment between SPD 2025 and SAP 2023-2027,the indicators and
targets Which contribute to the Strengthening Action Plan are indicated with a ticked box
in the annual tables hereinbelow. Moreover the number of FTEs linked to SAP 2023-2027
is also highlighted in a separate column。
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
47

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
B. Programmes (19)
B.1. Strategic statement 1
There will no longer be any technical and operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods
by rail, assets can be reused throughout Europe
B.1.1.
ERA1221 - Authority task management
The programme aims at supporting the process of delivering SSC, VAand TA decisions according to the legal framework in the most efficient and effective
Programmes objectives
Way. It also supports the dissemination of information from return of experience; provides and update guidance material for the three streams ofwork.
FTE
17.88
Budget
E1,596,912
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
Authority programme
999ofassessment team assigned within 10 working
management
Business helpdesk
09 ofanswers delivered in maximum 10 working
Follow-up of audit fndings for
1009 ofaudit recommendations closed by agreed deadline
authority processes
Invoicing of recovery orders
9896 ofinvoices issued according to the contractual deadlines
meetings organized to collect feedback identify lessons learned and possible improvement for ERA processes;
and procedures
VA Process maintenance
9596 of change requests implemented following the change control process
meetings organized to collect feedback identify lessons learned and possible improvement for ERA processes; guides and procedures
SSC Process maintenance
9596of change requests implemented following the change control process
meetings organized to collect feedback identify lessons learned and possible improvement for ERA processes;
and procedures
TA Process maintenance
959 of change requests implemented following the change control process
OSS maintenance and
9996availability during ERA service hours
improvement
9596 of signifcant problems detected during operation for Which solutions are identifed implemented in a next release:
Budget fgures only include EU contribution and F&C
48
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
days
days
guides
guides

8.1.2。
ERA3300
Delivering VA
Programmes objectives
Deliver VA decisions according to the legal framework in a harmonised way
FTE
18.55 +0.70 from SP
Budget
E2,144,416 (ofwhich E 2,124,000 for NSA costs and E 14,416 for PoE costs)
Outputs
Indicator
Target 
SAP
VA decisions
10096 of decisions taken according to the legal framework deadlines
8.1.3. ERA3400 -
Delivering TA
Programmes objectives
Deliver TA decisions according to the legal framework in an harmonised way
FTE
1.72
Budget
222,651 (allofwhich for POE costs)
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
TA decisions
1009 of decisions taken according to the legal framework deadlines
8.1.4。
ERA1218 - Manage ERTMS long term evolution
The objectives ofthe progamme ERA1218 are to
Maintain the CCS TSIand ERTMS specifcations. This includes updating the CCS TSI application guide, dissemination activities (incl. organisation of bi-
Programmes objectives
annual ERTMS conference) and maintaining the CCS TSI text and ERTMS specifcations.
Enhance the CCS TSIand ERTMS specifcations_
The ERA programme will focus on implementing the EC-request and System Pillar input by issuing a
recommendation by end 2026 (incl. FRMCS-specifcations) and issuing a recommendation by end 2028.
FTE
10.35+2.74 from SP
Budget
E150,000
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
49

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
Numberof ETCS and ATO enhancements CRs closed according to workplan
CCM
EECTETCS
Number of ETCS and ATO errors CRs closed according to workplan
Numberof RMR enhancement CRs closed according to workplan
CCM
EECT RMR (GSM-R & FRMCS)
Numberof RMR error CRs closed according to workplan
CCSTSI
Maintainand enhance
CCS TSI change requests developed from EC-mandate according to plan _
CCSframework
Working Parties managed according to ERTMS 2025 calendar_
ERTMS BCA report
Publication ofthe ERTMS BCA report (incl. results Of ERA questionnaires) according to TSI CCS point 7.2.10
Specifcations maintenance
ETCS generic handbook updated
ERTMS Operational harmonisation
Numberof CRs closed according to the workplan
Support for the EU-wide
1009 of CINEA-
DG Move requests assessed
deployment of ERTMS (e.g.CINEA)
8.1.5。
ERA1 175 -
Rolling stock and fxed installations harmonisation
The programme willaim at contributing to achieving SERA and the interoperability ofthe railway system by defning, maintaining. and supporting the
Programmes objectives
implementation ofthe optimum level of technical harmonisation. It focuses, among others, on TSIs, National Technical Rules; and standards:
FTE
6.05
3.07from SP
Budget
E65,000
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
10096 EC requests considered by ERA and allocated to a CR Workflow
TSI
programme implementation
7 Technical Working Groups organised
phase
Working Parties organised
Progress report to RISC at June meeting
NTR - assessment and reduction
10096 OfTOs sent after negative assessment of the notifed NR according to ERA regulation
through EU harmonisation
1009 ofthe VA NRs positively assessed by end 2024 to be transferred into TSIs CRs
Standards management
509ofthe mandatory references Of ENs in TSIs assessed
Support, assistance,and
1009 participation to NB Rail plenary and strategy to monitor the development of Q&Cs, RFUs, and logbook
coordination with relevant
2 ERA-UIC meetings held according to the coordination framework
stakeholders
TO/Advices/ Derogations delivered according to the procedure
50
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

B.1.6。
ERA1172 -
Railway aperations harmonisation
The programme aims at contributing to the harmonisation of operational rules and practices, as much as possible and accepted by all stakeholders;
Programmes objectives
With the objective of reducing operational barriers for the SERA and improving the overall performance ofthe railway system, including considering the
interfaces With other EU legislation including ongoinglfuture developments:
FTE
3.98+1.01 from SP
Budget _
E65,000
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
AMOCs
At least two draft AMOCs submitted to WP from among the following: Safety of Load, Tests&checks&braking, and ATB
NSRsassessment framework
ERA Technical document published on ERA website
10096 ofrules notifed in SRD analysed and with TO issued when needed respecting the ERA Regulation
NSRs cleaning-up process 1.0
(transition to SRD)
1009 ofthe States who have submitted their NSRs informed ofthe result of the ERA analysis
1009 ofreceived MS national plans received and analysed, and dashboard updated
NSRs
cleaning-up process 2.0 (TSI
OPE 2023 requirements)
1009 of SRD notifications assessed with TO when relevant respecting the ERA Regulation deadlines
NSRs review process (new draft
1009 of SRD notifcation
rules that ERA became aware of through other channels assessed with TO when relevant as per ERA Regulation
rules)
deadlines
Support to EC on Train Driver
1009 OfEC request(s) processed
Directive related tasks
Support to EC on Transportof
15TDG offcial meetings attended
Dangerous Goods
10096 of requests for amending the Application Guide analysed based on the Operational Harmonization group (ETCS) feedback and
TSIOPE Application Guide update
submitted toWP
TSIOPEimplementation
pilot
projects
Brenner Corridor
7096 of Brenner Corridor Platform meetings attended
Platform)
10096 of CR submitted to TSIOPE WP analysed and solutions provided so as to ensure the coherence between other EU legislation and the TSI
OPE
TSIOPErevision
Proposal for new TSI OPE structure submitted to ECand WP
Preparation ofthe 2026 TSI revision 1st deliverable
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
51
(e9.

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
8.1.7.
ERA1226 - Interoperable data
The programme intends to:
Increase the data interoperability in order to reduce costs and resources needed for data exchange
Programme's objectives
Separate data from the application layer for the different systems the Agency operates
Extend the Use of data and the existing registers to support business needs
USe Cases
Extend the ontology to coverthe railway system
FTE
13.39 +5.62from SP
Budget
E1,588,000
Outputs
Indicator
Target 
SAP
Cleaning-up of National specifc
parameters in the telematics
Analysis and publication of implemented National or Network Specific Parameters (NSPs)) by means OfTAFTAP by 04 2025
domain
Data centricity implementation
ERADIS+ in production and OCR VKM incorporated into the KG
data in KGin 03
for ERADIS+
OCR
VKM
EVR+
ERATV+ in production
data in KGin 03
ERATV+
EVR+ in production
data in KGin 03
Development of route knowledge
A pilot project developed using RINF data enriched with microlevel information as a proof of concept for a core common digital routebook。
based on digital routebook
Potential alternative routes in case of contingency provided.
10096 of compliance assessment reports produced in due time
3 months) for IT tools implementing TAF/TAP TSIs taking into account
ERA
compliance assessment
requirements from other regulations applying to the rail system and which development is under the aegis Of ERA e.9. OPETSL, ERA
reporting
Vocabulary Cleaning Up of National Rules;_
1009 of compliance assessment reports produced in due time
Assessment ofthe solution to allow accurate and full data history (who changed what and when in the data)
Formal publication ofa legally valid Ontology for CSM-ASLP
ISS
Report on the machine to machine pilot for data exchange With nationallcompany systems, including Agency recommendation for future
development:
Application Guide (AG) published 01
Single source of rail infrastructure
Rail data provision allows retrieval of historic and future rail infrastructure data
data
RINF
RINFt application in production to allow data upload as set out in the RINF regulation in 02 (including the new elements in the AG)
SRD
VA TSI compliance_
Enable Vehicle Authorisation rules notifcation against TSIs open point in SRD by 04 2025_
System Authority for Registers
alignment of legislative
Agency recommendations delivered to ensure alignment of registers with other legal instruments (TSIs, Interoperable Act etc)
frameworks
52
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Indicator
Target
SAP
ERA ontology includes telematics components as per TSI OPE (EU instructions), such as temporary capacity restrictions and timetable
Telematics enrichment with TSI
information linked to a route:
OPE
Pilot project to test route book information including timetable data completed
Telematics scheme seamlessly
integrated with ERA ontologyand
ERA KG pipeline from rail timetables and tariffs databases and NAPs towards ERA KG (pilot)
ERA KG
Transposition Of EU data policyin
Agency participates in the pilot phase of interoperability assessments in the Interoperable Europe Act
the ERA digital roadmap
Agency contributes regularly in the European Mobility Data Space regular meetings and surveys
Registers management
Register's related service requested by customers processed within 10 working days, as determined in the service level agreement
8.1.8。
ERA1240
System Pillar
Programmes objectives
This programme will aim at bringing a clearer defnition ofthe EU Target rail system: _
FTE
2.52 (20)
Budget _
C0
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
ERA contribution to the System
At least 2 position papers
comments on SP documents delivered
Pillar activities
ERA use of outputs from EU RailJU
Mature CRs from the SP integrated into the ERA CCM process
SPCG & SPSG
909of meetings attended by ERA
Technological watch
Update ofthe compelling vision published on ERA website before 31/12/2025
B.2. Strategic statement 2 &3
Rail will become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport
system and will be favoured as a transport mode by the new generation; rail traffc will become seamless and Maas (Mobility as a
Service) and Laas (Logistic as a Service) will be ensured, including multi-leg ticketing
The Agency portfolio has no programmes of which the main contribution is on strategic statement 2&3.
The allocation is higher than the contribution agreement foresees so as to Offset the lower contributions in 2024.This number might evolve based on the grant renewal negotiations。
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
53

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
B.3. Strategic Statement 4
Rail will bean increasingly safe and secure mode of transport for its users and workers
8.3.1.
ERA3200
Delivering SSC
Programmes objectives
Deliver SSC decisions according to the legal frameworkin a harmonised way
FTE
6.63
1.51
Budget
E1,035,866 (ofwhich E 876,000 for NSA costs and E 147,366 for POE costs)
Outputs
Indicator
Target 
SAP
SSC decisions
10096 ofdecisions taken according to the legal framework deadlines
8.3.2. ERA1219 - CSMASLP
The programme will aim at the strengthening of safe operations via harmonising the collection, sharing of information, analysis, and user support to
Programmes objectives
implement safety legislation, incl. strengthening the JNS through its legal implementation:
FTE
3.50 +0.70from SP
Budget
E15,000
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
CSM ASLP development
Publication of frst version and then maintenance of mandatory Technical Documents, including support to ISS development
CSM ASLP guidance development
First version guidance available and presented by GoA working groups for approval
fast track procedure completed
GoAIJNS procedures
normal procedure
Cross wind
completed
Management of GoA
At least
steering committee meeting organised & 5 subgroups and plenary meetings
Support to CSMASLP and ISS
cUstomers to
populate and
809 ofanswers delivered in 10 working
consume data
54
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
days

8.3.3。
ERA1 167 - Sustainable 
safety management
The programme has 2 main objectives:
To supportthe sectorin terms of
safety management (incl. the management of Human and Organisational factors) by:
Clarifying the legal requirements;
Explaining how these requirements can contribute to achieving broader business objectives;
This will be achieved through regular coordination and dialogue with the sector and through specifc and targeted initiatives:
Programmes objectives
2
To support the sectorin improving the learning from accidents and near-misses by:
Encouraging knowledge sharing
Proposing methods for harmonised and deep analysis
This will be achieved through:
Ensuring comprehensive and timely feedback mechanisms
Conducting a detailed study to explore the potential of utilizing operational data more effectively;
Implementing dedicated communication channels;
FTE
7.29
Budget
E36,250
Outputs
Indicator
Target 
SAP
HOF network meeting organised
HOF
dissemination
Presentation of HOF topic during ERA safety days and one external conference
Increased performance of SMS
draft new regulation of Type 5 NSR _
Guidance/training developed
Strengthen ASBO control level
3 working group meetings organised , 3 technical meetings organised,at least 2 RFU delivered
coordination of ASBOs
Strengthen ASBO control level
Assessment scheme for Assessment bodies (CSM RA) developed
sharing knowledge
Strengthen ECM control level
3 coordination meetings and 3 technical meetings organised
coordination with ECMs
Strengthen ECM control level
Support material on ECM certifcation published or delivered in accordance with the multi-annual action plan
sharing knowledge
1009 of bilateral feedback provided to NIB within 6 months from the time of the request
Strengthen NIB control level
Voluntary participation Of NIBs in the CSM ASLP ISS test phase ensured and documented
sharing knowledge
Webinar/specifc seminar on accident/incident investigation
organised
Strengthen SMS
sharing
TDG RMP connection between risk estimation engine and user interface functional
knowledge
Web page containing an interactive SMS wheel including detailed navigation
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
55

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
8.3.3。
ERA1249 - STARS (2)
The programme intends to improve the implementation of the railway legislation by EU railway stakeholders (sector and authorities) and enhance
Programmes objectives
Safety culture in railways across Europe
FTE
3.06
Budget
E153,000
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
Safety events content defnition
Content for safety days prepared
1009 delivery of the updated training plan
10006 of requests for corporate safety training and assistance responded
Safety training developmentand
2new modules on the platform (language and/or content) embedded on the ERA e-learning platform
delivery
2 new training courses expanding the ERA safety training portfolio (classroom _
online training)
2025 campaign launched for the qualifcation scheme for safety training subject to positive feedback from the Pilot
8.3.4。
ERA1253
Capacity building on Safety & Interoperabilityin Greece
Programmes' objectives
The programme intends to improve the implementation and application of the EU regulatory framework on railway safety and interoperability in Greece
FTE
24
Budget
N/A
The programmes operational expenditure will be fnanced through a dedicated contribution agreement。
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
All relevant E-learning tools (EU railway safety culture model, organisational just culture basics, SSC for assessors) translated in the Greek
Capacity building on Safety
language
At least 4 sessions oftrainings/ workshops on risk management; supervision and competences management system delivered
Capacity building on Safety and
reports on capacity building workshops and on the support provided regarding ERTMS implementation delivered
Interoperability
Final Report
Sent to DG Reform
Safety Trainings and Assistance to Rail Stakeholders
56
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

8.3.5。
ERA1224
Monitoring NSA/NoBo & NIB
review
The programme aspires to identify anticipate, and avoid issues that may raise from an incorrect implementation by NSAS/NoBosINIBs of the requirements
Programmes' objectives
of EU legislation on railway safety and interoperability in the respective MSs:
FTE
8.96+4.17from SP
Budget_
E288,000
Outputs
Indicator
Target 
46450
4 NIB peer reviews supported
ERA attending all NIB Task Force meetings
'Knowledge hub" to promote best practices and train NoBos (widening it to EU accession countries) started at the end ofthe 1st NoBo audit
NIB
Cycle:
20 NoBo audits or inspections performed (incl. follow-Up)
At least 12 reports for NoBos audit/inspection delivered
NSA audits performed onsite
NSAs
Report on
fndings from Znd NSA monitoring cycle delivered to MB (incl. conclusions from 1st cycle and possible recommendation for future
MB Decision)
B.4. Strategic Statement 5
Rail will be resilient and agile in responding to emergency situations
The Agency portfolio has no programmes of which the main contribution is on strategic statement 5.
B.5. Strategic Statement 6
Rail will become increasingly economically competitive as a mode and as a sector
B.5.1. ERA1 188 - Economic
analysis andresearch
The programme has 2 main objectives:
Programmes' objectives
To provide analytical support throughout the Agency and its stakeholders in order to deliver objective and credible evidence for decision-making;
2
Toidentify and monitor rail research activities to support technical progress ofthe Single European Railway Area;
FTE
5.39
Budget
E69,300
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
57
peer

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
Environment management
7596ofthe initiatives/actions of Environment management (Annex VI) actions planned for current year completed
Impact assessments for RECs / OPIs
6 Impact assessments delivered in line with the TSI revision package
Research project monitoring
Research projects with ERA levelof interest 3 (high interest) monitored through yearly report_
Statutory reports
CSTreport available 31/03/2025, annual overviews available by 03 2025
Targeted studies
Complete targeted studies in line with the time schedule ofthe TSI revision package
8.6. Strategic Statement 7
The EU will become the
 global reference for rail and ERA authorisations will be globally recognised
8.6.1.
ERA1 145 - Stakeholder Relations
Academy & Communication
Communicate and disseminate to relevant stakeholders information relating to the Union framework of railway law and the development of standards
Programmes' objectives
and guidance in accordance With relevant communication and dissemination plans adopted by the Management Board.
FTE
11.36
Budget _
E903,897
Outputs
Indicator
Target 
SAP
Events & Conferences
Organised as perthe Communication and Dissemination plan
External engagement (networks;
social media, webinars, media
Implemented as perthe Communication and Dissemination plan
relations, publications)
Internal Communication
Implemented as perthe Communication and Dissemination plan
Training
Developed and implemented as perthe Communication and Dissemination plan
Website
Maintenance and update ofthe website; as perthe business needs
86.2.
ERA1 147 - Internatjonal Relations
It will, upon request of the Commissionand in line with the EU priorities and the Agency's mandate; in the Unions neighbourhood policy areas and
Programmes' objectives
beyond promote EU railways legislation, standards, and related railway knowledge in line with specifc needs, and contribution agreements/grants。
FTE
4.95
Budget _
E15,000
58
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
Adoption ofthe updated Strategy for relations With third countries or international organisation
Collaboration with OTIF ensured
International cooperation
Engagement with other international regulation bodies (Platform ofregulators) ensured
Status report on the contribution instruments developments (Grant and Contribution agreement)
Support to ECin wider international engagement provided_
invitation fortraineeship submitted
IPAand Western Balkans
training sessions delivered
8.7
Strategic Statement 8 -
The Agency will ensure an effective and effcient governance ofits portfolio of activities in order to offer
the best value for money to citizens and business in the EU
8.7.1.
ERA1156 - Corporate governance
The programme intends to ensure that the Agencyis:
Programmes' objectives
Sufficiently resourced;
Diverse and collegial;
Performing efficiently, effectively, and in a legally compliant manner following envisaged strategies
FTE
13.20+2.15 from SP
Budget
E 75,000
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
<1096ofcarry-over of payment appropriations forTI
<2096 Of carry-over of payment appropriations forT2 _
<3096 of carry-over of payment appropriations forT3
>9596 of execution of carried-over payment appropriations from the previous year
Budget management
>9596 of payments made by contractual deadline
>9896 ofappropriations committed _
1009 of budget transfers approved in line with ERA Financial Regulation provisions
At least 5 intermediate and
annual budget execution reports prepared
EBand MB proceedings
MB/EB secretariat organised and support provided as per the EB and MB rules of procedure
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
59

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Indicator
Target 
SAP
1009 of processes leaned
1009 ofnonconformities identifed for which corrective/preventive actions are identifed
1009 of IAS/ECA recommendations implemented in line with the action plan
Internal managementand control
Documented assessment of the effectiveness ofthe Internal control framework
system (IMCS)
Agency's most signifcant risks identifed, assessed, documented and reported in CAAR. Remedial action plans put in place_
2 reports on Ex-post controls of legality and regularity of fnancial transactions
2 reports on biannual review Of SUMMA access rights _
Portfolio management
At least 8 monthly management review reports (MMRR) delivered and actions followed-uP
At least 4 corporate strategies steered and monitored (e.9.SAP HR strategy; Womenin Transport ICTstrategy)
Strategic monitoring
SPD 2025 monitoring Dashboard presented to EB/MB (at
meeting)
SPD 2025 substantial and non-substantial amendments adopted by MB (substantial)/ by ED (non-substantial) as needed
First draft of SPD 2026
2028 endorsed by MB by January and
document adopted by MB by November
Strategic planning
MB workshop for SPD 2027
2029 organised, workshop report circulated and any potential follow-Up strategies identifed
Strategic reporting
CAAR 2024 adopted by MB by June
8.7.2.
ERA1159 -
Legalsupport, accounting
procurement
Programmes' objectives
Provide support to the Agency to ensure legal compliance and perform the
duties ofaccounting, and procurement。
FTE
7.74
Budget _
E 900O0 (exc. budget line underT2
T4.2on Legal expenses)
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
Accounting
Positive opinion in the CoA annual report on reliable Agency accounts
29596 issuance of fndings and decisions ofthe Board of Appeal on time; according to the Agency's role as the Registrar for the Board of
Board ofthe Appeal
Appeal
Registrar role ensured as perarticle
oflmpl Reg. 2018/867
At least 1596of Agency s staff trained on antifraud and Ethics pereach type oftraining
Ethics
At least 909 ofannual declaration of interests
Dol) submitted by staff members
Legal support
10096 of Iegal acts issued by the Agency: as defned y the Agency regulation. for which legal advice was provided _
8596 of procurement procedures timely organised out ofthe total number of procurement procedures planned in the annual procurement
Procurement
plan
1009 of pieces ofadvice and consultation provided on time
Securis
ERA
9596ofinformation assets in the inventory which have an up-to-date risk assessment
60
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
every
fnal
key

8.8. Strategic Statement 9 - The Agency will ensurea
performant working environment, based on high-quality motivated human
resources and a collaborative behaviour
88.1.
ERA1201 - ICT
To bring value to the Agencys internal and external customers by providing technologies and techniques to manage information and knowledge This
Programmes' objectives
includes information-handling tools used to produce; store; process, distribute and exchange information within ERA scope:
FTE
11.14
Budget
E 975,000 from relevant chapters in T3/4.3 +E 1,575,000 from relevant chapters in T2/T4.2
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
Cloud migration of the registers
Migration of registers fnalised in line with the defned roles and responsibilities
Documentand Record
Support to ARES users provided
Management
1009 of operational systems with Up-to-date ITsecurity plan
Information system catalogue defned
IT Cybersecurity
Security plans updated
Cybersecurity framework established according to the plan in the Regulation
IT Digital Services
Enterprise Content Management and Identity Management ensured at Corporate level
IT budget management
Budget execution targets reached
IT Governance and Compliance
IT risk register updated annually and adopted by MT
9596 Availability of critical information systems
Infrastructure
9796 availability of the core ICT systems
Disaster Recovery Exercise performed for each Information system at least once peryear
IT Service Desk
709 Users' satisfaction feedback "Good/Excellent" rate of Service Desk
仃
Learning & Development
out of 3 training contracted/developed and delivered on Agile/Togaf/Cloud Management delivered to
identifed ERA staff:
88.2。
ERA1202 - Facility Management
Demonstrating effective and effcient delivery of services that support the Agencys objectives;
Programmes' objectives
2
Consistently meeting the needs ofinterested parties and applicable requirements, and
3
Being sustainable in a globally competitive environment。
FTE
6.55
Budget
E1,172,000 from relevant chapters in T2/T4.2
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
61
pre-

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
evacuation exercise performed by external contractor
maintenance ofthe defbrillator performed by external contractor
Building Maintenance
mandatory check ofthe lift per month performed by external contractor
mandatory check ofthe power
performed by external contractor
Update of 《 document unique 》 performed (French legal requirement for buildings)
709 Users' satisfaction feedback "Good/Excellent" rate of Service Desk
Customer support
Offce removals organised and performed by external contractors
ERA environmental footprint
report delivered on ERA environmental footprint (paper consumption from printing. carbon footprint of missions)
FM budget management
Budget execution targets reached
FM Security
Report on implementation ofvideo surveillance. (report available for MT)
88.3。
ERA1203 - Human Resources
Programmes' objectives
Ensure compliance With staff regulations and implementing rules
FTE
8.14
Budget_
458,949 from relevant chapters in TITT4.1 (excl. Ch.11/41(1))
Outputs
Indicator
Target 
1009 ofE-CF tool up to date
Competency Management
Competency framework reviewed and updated
Learning & Development
90oo ofthe L&D budget implemented _
Annual
&D report published
Performance
Appraisal and reclassifcation exercise performed within the deadline
< than 59of staff turnover
Selection
2 than 959ofthe establishment plan implemented
List with suitable laureates from selections
709 Users' satisfaction feedback "Good/Excellent" rate Of Service Desk
event with Valenciennes partners organised
Actions plan from staff survey on Wellbeing drafted
Staff Administration
HR strategy actions implemented according to the plan
Process contract management and staff administration with PMO moved to EC tools (e.9. Sysper MIPS)
Sysper appraisal module implemented and applied
Sysper job description module deployed
62
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
grid

88.4。
ERA1207 - New
Building
To defne and integrate ERAs requirements into the new building's design and construction, ensuring it meets our organisations functional, sustainability;
Programmes' objectives
and capacity needs. This programme aims to deliver a modern, effcient; and adaptable infrastructure that supports productivity, innovation; and a
seamless transition for services and staff
FTE
0.6
Budget
C0
Outputs
Indicator
Target
SAP
New Building
2 progress reports delivered to MT
Methodological note:
A
FTEs
the resources are planned for the Strategic Statements (in line with the envelopes shown above), as wellas for ERA Management and administration.
The table shows in a separate column ("Additional FTEs from SAP") the allocation ofthe additional resources envisaged in the EC proposal (12 TAs).
The margin up to the maximum establishment plan accommodated the difference between headcount and FTEs (e.9. part time work etc )
Strategic statement
FTE
FTEfrom SP
Total FTE
Strategic statement
74.44
13.14
87.58
Strategic statement 283
Strategic statement 4
30.68
6.47
37.15
Strategic statement 5
Strategic statement 6
5.39
5.39
Strategic statement
16.3-
16.31
Strategic statement 8
20.94
2.15
23.09
Strategic statement 9
26.43
26.43
ERA Management and administration
8.59
8.59
Total
182.78
21.76
204.55
MULTI-ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2025-2027
63

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
B
the fnancial resources are planned as follows:
Feesand
Expenditures
Note on the link to the Pg from theannual section
EU Subsidy
Total
charges
Staff costs
These are not included in the Pg budget envelopes in the annual section above
E23,881,904
E8,428,737
E32,310,640
Infrastructure operating expenditure
These are included in the budget for the ICT service and the FM service (StSt 9)
2,207,600
E539400
2,747,000
Operational expenditure
These are included in the budget for all the Pg's in StStl
StSt 9
3,623,447
E4,889,846
8,513,293
Out ofwhich costs for NSAs for the F&C
Allocated by ERA Pgs (ERA3200,3300,3400)
E3,000,000
E3,000,000
Outofwhich costs for PoE forthe F&C
Allocated by ERA Pgs (ERA3200,3300,3400)
E384,434
E384,434
Meetings, missions; other costs
Not allocated by ERA Pg
E52,509
52,509
Other operational expenditure
Allocated underthe ICT Pgin StStg
780,000
E195,000
975,000
TOTAL
E30,545,459
E14,052,983
E44,598,442
64
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Budget-

I.
Annexes
k》:
I
4 I0

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex |.
Organisational chart
Figure1
Organisational chart as of 01/01/2025
Legend
Executive Director (ED)
Department
ED Offce
Railway Systems (RSY)
Accounting
Unit
Legal
Ethnics
Rolling Stock & Fixed
Innovation and Technology
Installations (FIRST)
Team (Sector)
Legal & Procurement (LPROC)
Safety Training &
Assistance [] (STARS)
Safety & Operations (SAFO)
Task Force
ERTMS (ERTMS)
Supportto Greece (STG)
Planning & Approvals Delivery
Monitoring; Analysis, Ressearch
Corporate Assurance &
Operational Data (OPD)
Resources & Support (RSU)
(PAD)
& Stakeholders (MARS)
Performance (CAP)
Vehicle
Operation Data
Corporate
Human Resources
Analysis (ALSY)
Authorization (VA)
Policy (ODP)
Governance (CGO)
(HR)
Safety Certifcation
Operational Data
Portfolio Management
Information
Monitoring (MONI)
(SSC)
Systems (0DS)
& Performance (PMP)
Technology (IT)
ERTMIS Trackside
Stakeholders Rel.
Semantics &
Budget Planning; Monit
Facility Management
Approval (TA)
Academy & Comm (SAC)
Ontology (5O)
& Control (BMIC)
(FMI)
Authority Tasks
Internal Management &
Data Lab
FM
New Building (FMNB)
Support (ATS)
Control (IMC)
66
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Table 6 - Number of posts for each
organisational entity (22)
EU contribution & Fees & charges
Grants; Contrib & SLAs
Department, Unit or Task force; Team (Sector)
Grand Total 
TA
CA
SNE
5 Posts
TA
CA
SNE
5Posts
Executive Director (ED)
8
11
11
ED (general)
Legal & Procurement
PROC)
Railway Systems (RSY)
55
60
3 (23)
3
63
RSY (general)
Rolling Stock & Fixed Installations (FIRST)
17
17
18
Safety & Operations (SAFO)
12
16
2
18
SAFO (general)
15
17
Safety Training & Assistance to Railway Stakeholders (STARS)
ERTMS & Telematics (ERTMS)
18
19
19
Support to Greece (STG)
Planning & Approvals Delivery (PAD)
24
32
32
PAD (general)
3 (24)
5
5
Vehicle Authorisation (VA)
12
12
Safety Certifcation (SSC)
5
ERTMS Trackside Approval (TA)
2
3
3
Authority Task Support (ATS)
Monitoring, Analysis, Research & Stakeholders (MARS)
27
10
38
39
MARS (qeneral)
5
Analysis (ALSY)
5
5
Monitoring (MONI)
12
13
13
Stakeholders Relations, Academy & Communications (SAC)
5
14
(25)
15
Operational Data (OPD)
16
21
21
OPD (general)
Operational Data Policy (ODP
Operational Data Systems (ODS)
Semantics &
Ontology (SO) _
Data Lab
Expressed in terms ofheadcount; as Of 01/01/2025,all posts (incl. vacancies)
1.5 FTEon System Pillar (MOVE/C4/SUB/2021-454)as perthe agreement, with an addition
FTE to offset the 2024 defcit- see Annex XI. There is an ongoing amendment; which should be finalised by 04 2024.
Incl
post not planned to be filled as per SAP
see Annex XI
0.5 FTEon IPA IIl (2023/450-269)
see Annex Xl
ANNEX I. ORGANISATIONAL CHART
67

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
EU contribution & Fees & charges
Grants; Contrib & SLAs
Department, Unit or Task force; Team (Sector)
Grand Total
TA
CA
SNE
5Posts 
TA
CA
SNE
5Posts
Corporate Assurance & Performance (CAP)
15
16
16
CAP (qeneral)
3
Corporate Governance (CGO)
5
Portfolio Management & Performance (PMP)
Budget Planning, Monitoring & Control (BMC)
Internal Management and Control (IMC)
Resources & Support (RSU)
20
26
26
RSU (general)
Human Resources (HR)
Information Technology (IT)
10
10
Facilities Management (FM)
5
Facilities Management
New Building (FMNB)
Grand Total
166
36
206
210
68
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Annex I.
Resource allocation peractivity
2025-2027 (26)
Table 7
Overview ofrevenues
2024
2025
2026
2027
Activity
Revenue source 
CA +
CA +
CA + 
CA +
CFTE 
TA
Budgete 
5FTE 
TA
Budget
CFTE 
TA
Budget f 
CFTE
TA
Budget E 
SNE
SNE
SNE
SNE
EU contrib。
43.4
395
3.9
8,211,079
46.0
41.7
4.3
10,426,736
46.7
42.2
4.6
10,563,081
47.3
42.0
5.3
10,727,146
StSt
F&C
33.7
26.3
7.4
8,505,519
38.8
29.6
9.2
11,104,688
38.9
29.7
9.2
11,148,934
388
29.6
9.2
11,422,601
6,CSLA
3.0
2.7
0.3
600,800
28
28
395,250
28
0.0
28
2.0
2.0
StSt 2-3
EU contrib。
3.0
2.8
0.
535,364
00
00
0.0
00
0.0
EU contrib:
25.6
21.2
4.4
4.447.181
28.9
24.4
4.5
5,478,029
27.8
23.3
4.5
5,554,014
27.3
22.8
45
5,557,801
StSt 4
FgC
7.2
5.9
1.3
2,144,390
8.3
7.0
1.2
2,585,827
85
7.3
1.3
2,698,890
8.
68
1.3
2,642,889
StSt 5
EU contrib
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
00
00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
StSt 6
EU contrib。
3.3
3.3
0.0
635,759
5.4
5.3
00
998,990
5.4
5.4
0.0
1,054,029
5.4
5.4
0.0
1,072,640
EU contrib:
11.0
5.9
5.1
2,976,189
16.3
7.7
86
3,733,262
16.3
7.6
86
4,063,667
16.3
7.6
8.6
4,178,925
StSt
6,CSLA
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22,500
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
EU contrib。
29.4
21.2
8.2
5,286,754
23.
20.
3.0
4,109,743
22.9
19.9
3.0
4,299,014
22.
19.
3.0
4,223,514
StSt 8
F&C
00
0.0
0.0
40,000
0.0
00
00
40,000
0.0
0.0
0.0
40,000
StSt 9
EU contrib。
26.7
20.1
6.6
5,303,205
26.4
19.4
7.1
4,560,492
26.4
19.4
7.1
4,808,079
26.4
19.4
7.1
4,886,205
EU contrib。
8.8
7.6
1.3
2,272,975
6.9
6.1
0.8
1,238,207
6.9
6.
0.8
1,311,042
6.7
5.9
08
296,462
M8A
F&C
8.1
6.4
1.7
1,263,247
1.7
1.5
0.2
322,467
1.7
1.5
0.2
338095
1.7
1.5
0.2
335,879
C EU contribution
151.1
121.6
29.6
29,668,506
153.0
124.6
28.4
30,545,459
152.5
123.9
28.6
31,652,926
151.5
122.2
29.3
31,942,692
C Fees and charges
49.0
38.6
10.4
11,913,156
48.8
38.2
10.6
14,012,983
49.1
38.5
10.7
14,225,918
48.6
37.9
10.7
14,441,368
Total EU + FRC
200.1
160.1
40.0
41,581,662
201.8
162.8
39.0
44,558,442
201.6
162.4
39.3
45,878,844
200.1
160.1
40.0
46,384,060
2 Grant Contr. & SLA
3.0
2.7
0.3
600,800
2.8
0.0
2.8
417,750
2.8
0.0
2.8
2.0
0.0
2.0
Grand Total
203.1
162.8
40.3
42,182,462
204.5
162.8
41.8
44,976,192
204.4
162.4
42.0
45,878,844
202.1
160.1
42.0
46,384,060
Staffnumbers
in line with EU Draft Budget"2.1.2 European Union Agency for Railways
ERA"
include statutory staff only (establishment plan and external staff); as a consequence, Structural service providers,and Interim workers are not includ-
ed. External staff fnanced from grant contribution or service-level agreements are shown on separate lines
As per the adopted budget 2024
ANNEXI. RESOURCE ALLOCATION PER ACTIVITY 2025-2027 ()
69

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex Ill.
Financial resources
A.1.
ReVenue
A.1.1.
Generalrevenues
Table 7 - Overview ofrevenues
Revenues
2024
2025
(EUR)
Estimated
Budget forecast
2.EU contribution
28,645,912
29,733,355
1.+3.
十4+5.
+6
7.Otherrevenue
12,935,750
14,865,087
Ofwhich 1. Revenues from fees and charges
1,913,156
14,052,983
Ofwhich 3. Third country contribution (= EFTA)
1,022,594
812,104
Total revenues
41,581,662
44,598,442
Table 8 - General revenues
2025
VAR
2026
2027
2023 Budget
2024 Budget
Revenues
Agency
Budget
2025/2024
Envisaged
Envisaged
(EUR)
(EUR)
request (EUR)
forecast (EUR)
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR)
1. Revenues from fees and charges
10,312,858
11,913,156
14052,983
18.09
14,225,918
14,441,368
2
EU contribution*
27,418,274
28,645,912
29,733,355
3.89
30,810,874
31,092,804
ofwhich assigned revenues deriving from previous years' surpluses
639
81,821
111,313
36.09
3. Third countries contribution (incl. EEAIEFTA and candidate countries)
801,315
,022,594
812,104
20.69
842,052
849,888
ofwhich EEA/EFTA (excl. Switzerland)
801,315
1,022,594
812,104
-20.696
842,052
849,888
ofwhich candidate countries
Other contributions
5
Administrative operations
70
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

2025
VAR
2026
2027
2023 Budget
2024 Budget
Revenues
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency
Budget
2025/2024
Envisaged
Envisaged
request (EUR)
forecast (EUR)
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR)
ofwhich interest generated by funds paid by the Commission by wayof
the EU contribution (FFR Art 61)
6
Revenues from services rendered against payment
7
Correction of budgetary imbalances
Total revenues
38,532,447
41,581,662
44,598,442
pm。
7.39
45,878,844
46,384,060
A.1.2.
Additional EU funding: grant; contribution and service-level agreements
Table 9 - Overview on additional EU funding
2024
2025
Revenues 
Budget (EUR)
Budget forecast (EUR)
Total revenues
628,300
417,750
Table 10 -
Additional EU funding: grant, contribution and service-level agreements
2025
2026
2027
2023
2024
VAR 2025/2024
Revenues
Budget (EUR)
Budget (EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(%)
Envisaged
Envisaged
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Additional EU funding stemming from Grants (FFR Art7)
427,500
22,500
22,500
94.79
Dm
Additional EU funding stemming from Contribution
475,410
1,200,800
395,250
395,250
67.09
pm.
Agreements (FFR Art.7)
Additional EU funding stemming from Service-Level
Agreements (FFR Art. 43.2)
Total
475,410
1,628,300
417,750
417,750
-74.39
pm。
Forthe list ofagreements and further details, refer to Annex XL PlanforgrantcontributionOrservice-leyelagreements:
There is an ongoing amendment ofthe System Pillar contribution agreement; which should be finalised by 04.This number will evolve accordingly。
Ibid
Ibid。
Ibid
ANNEX
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
71

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
A.2. Expenditures
A.Z.1. Expenditure
Table 11
Expenditure
2024
2025
Expenditure
(EUR)
Commitment
Commitment
Paymentappropriations
Payment appropriations
appropriations
appropriations
Title
Staff expenditure
22,654,387
22,654,387
23,881,904
23,881,904
Title 2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
2,146,913
2,146,913
2,207,600
2,207,600
Title 3
Operational expenditure
4,867.206
4,867,206
4,455,955
4.,455,955
Total EU contribution
29,668,506
29,668,506
30,545,459
30,545,459
Title 4.1
Staff expenditure
7,633,433
7,633,433
8,428,737
8,428,737
Title 4.2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
540,08
540,08-
539,400
539,400
Title 4.3
Operational expenditure
3,739,636
3,739,636
5,084,846
5,084,846
Total Fees and charges
11,913,156
11,913,156
14,052,983
14,052,983
Total EU contribution
Fees & charges
41,581,662
41,581,662
44,598,442
44,598,442
Title 5
Grant Agreements
427.500
427,500
22.,500
22,500
Title 5 - Contribution Agreements
200,800
200,800
395,250
395,250
Title 5
Service-Level Agreements
Total Grants, Contrib. & SLAs
1,628,300
1,628,300
417,750
417,750
Grand Total
43,421,338
43,421,338
45,016,192
45,016,192
A.2.2.
Commitment appropriations
Table 12 - Commitment
appropriations (EU contribution)
2025 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2023 Budget
2024 Budget
VAR 2025/2024
(EU contribution)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 1
Staff expenditure
23,387,602
22,654,387
23,881,904
23,881,904
5.49
Salaries & allowances
22,855,686
22,160,605
23,314,704
23,314,704
5.296
Ofwhich establishment plan posts
20,091,094
19,422,988
20,340,349
20,340,349
4.79
Ofwhich external personnel
2,764,592
2,737,617
2,974,355
2,974,355
8.696
There is an ongoing amendment ofthe System Pillar contribution agreement; which should be finalised by 04 2024.The number will evolve accordingly。
72
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

2025 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2023 Budget
2024 Budget
VAR 2025/2024
(EU contribution)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Expenditure relating to staff recruitment
117,600
66,317
12,000
12,000
81.99
Employers pension contributions
Mission expenses
8000
7.990
12,000
12,000
50.29
Socio-medical infrastructure
60,000
44,744
47.200
47.200
5.596
Training
120,000
119,850
136,000
136,000
13.59
External services
207,917
233,308
314,400
314,400
34.89
Receptions, events and representation
2,400
1,598
1,600
,600
0.19
Social welfare
16,000
19,975
44,000
44,000
120.396
Other Staff related expenditure
Title 2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
2,096,800
2,146,913
2,207,600
2,207,600
2.89
Rental of buildings and associated costs
990,400
916,453
917,600
917,600
0.19
Information communication technology and data processing
954,400
950,810
952,000
952,000
9
Movable property and associated costs
28,800
135,830
144,000
44,000
09
Current administrative expenditure
27,200
19975
20,000
20,000
0.19
Postage
telecommunications
92,000
123,845
174,000
174,000
40.59
Meeting expenses
Running costs in connection with operational activities
Information and publishing
4000
Studies
Other infrastructure and operating expenditure
Title 3
Operational expenditure
2,735,187
4,867,206
4,455,955
4,455,955
-8.49
Operational expenditure
Strategic Statements _
949,223
4,020,266
3,675,955
3,675,955
8.69
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
517,460
1,117,000
2,018000
2,018000
80.79
Ofwhich Strategic Statements 2 &3
93,688
42,538
100.09
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 4
208,953
381,003
492,250
492,250
29.29
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 5
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 6
30,400
80,400
69,300
69,300
13.89
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
625,246
1,419,298
918897
918,897
35.39
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 8
357,800
808,416
125,000
125,000
84.59
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
594
120,625
00.0%
Ofwhich ERA management and administration
115,083
50,986
52,509
52,509
3.096
Other operational expenditure
785,964
846,940
780,000
780,000
-7.99
Total
28,219,589
29,668,506
30,545,459
30,545,459
3.09
ANNEX
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
73

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Table 13
Commitmentappropriations (Fees and charges)
2025 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2023 Budget
2024 Budget
VAR 2024/2023
(Feesand charges)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(9)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Title 4.1
Staff expenditure
6,578,851
7,633,433
8,428,737
8,428,737
10.49
Salaries &allowances
5,799,499
6,781,230
7,536,987
7.,536,987
11.19
Ofwhich establishment plan posts
4,997,778
5,864,707
6,540,641
6,540,641
1.596
Ofwhich external personnel
801,722
916,523
996,346
996,346
796
Expenditure relating to staff recruitment
16,683
3,000
3,000
82.09
Employer's pension contributions _
727,373
727,985
749,949
749,949
3.09
Mission expenses
2010
3,000
3,000
49.39
Socio-medical infrastructure
1,256
11,800
1,800
4.89
Training。
30,150
34,000
34,000
12.89
External services
51,979
58,692
78,600
78,600
33.99
Receptions, events and representation
402
400
400
-0.59
Social welfare
5,025
11,000
1,000
18.99
Other Staff related expenditure
Title 4.2
Infrastructure and operating expenditure
459,893
540,087
539,400
539,400
-0.19
Rentalof buildings and associated costs
183,293
230,547
229,400
229,400
-0.596
Information communication technology and data processing _
238,600
239,190
238000
238,000
-0.59
Movable property and associated costs
7,200
34,170
36,000
36,000
5.49
Current administrative expenditure
800
5,025
5,000
5,000
0.59
Postage
telecommunications
23,000
31,155
31,000
31,000
0.59
Meeting expenses
Running costs in connection with operational activities
Information and publishing
1,000
Studies
Other infrastructure and operating expenditure
Title 4.3
Operational expenditure
3,274,114
3,739,636
5,084,846
5,084,846
36.09
Operational expenditure
Strategic Statements
3,491,411
3,526,576
4,889,846
4,889,846
38.796
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
2,345,578
2,649,092
3,813,980
3,813,980
44.096
Ofwhich Strategic Statements 2-3
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 4
732,045
877,484
1,035,866
1,035,866
18.09
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 5
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 6
74
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

2025 Budget
Titles & Chapters
2023 Budget
2024 Budget
VAR 2024/2023
(Feesand charges)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Agency request
Budget forecast
(%)
(EUR)
(EUR)
Ofwhich Strategic Statement
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 8
40,000
40,000
Ofwhich Strategic Statement 9
Ofwhich ERA management and administration
Other operational expenditure
96,491
213,060
95,000
95,000
8.59
Total
10,312,858
11,913,156
14,052,983
14,052,983
18.09
A.Z.3. Payment
appropriations
Payment appropriations in current and planning years are identical to commitment appropriations:
A.3. Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations
Table 14 - Budget outturn and cancellation of appropriations
Budget outturn (EUR)
2020
2021
2022
2023
Reserve from the previous years' surplus (+)
59,486
114,225
69,638
81,821
Revenue actually received (+)
30,761,007
32,834,965
34,703,739
40,357,546
Payments made
27.440,679
-29,908,642
-33,246,670
-37,311,979
Carry-overof appropriations
4,097,690
-3,894,958
3,565,238
5,251,707
Cancellation ofappropriations carried over
106,232
30,110
40,317
76,465
Adjustment for carry over ofassigned revenue appropriations from previous year (+)
785,738
1,008,478
2.150676
2,245,241
Exchange rate differences (+/)
-383
-315
1002
-4,253
Adjustment for negative balance from previous year ( )
59,486
114,225
69,638
81,821
Total
114,225
69,638
81,821
111,313
ANNEX
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
75

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex IV.
Human Resources 2025-2027
quantitative
A.1.
Staff
population and its evolution: overview ofall categories of staff
A.1.1. Statutory staff and SNE
2023
Human resources 
FTE 
2024
2025
2026
2027
Establishment plan posts
corresponding
Actually flled as
Occupancy rate %
Authorised staff 
Envisaged staff
Envisaged staff
Envisaged
toauthorised
0f31/12/2023
budget
Administrators (AD)
136 (34)
134
98.59
137
137
134
132
Assistants (AST)
30 (34)
29
96.79
29 (36)
29
28
28
Assistants/Secretaries (AST/SC)
Total establishment plan posts
166
163
98.29
166
166
162
160
FTE 
FTE
FTE
corresponding
Actually flled as
 corresponding
corresponding
External staff
Execution rate %
Envisaged FTE 
Envisaged FTE
toauthorised
0f31/12/2023
toauthorised
toauthorised
budget
budget
budget
Contract Agents (CA)
36
34
94.49
36
36
36
36
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
2
5096
(38)
Total external staff
40
36
90.09
40
40
40
40
Total staff
206
199
96.69
206
206
202
200
Staff fnanced from grant, contribution or service-level agreements not included in this table; but under Additional external staff expected to be financed from
contribution or service-levelagreements below
2 AST posts converted to ADas per MB Decision n" 332
Ofwhich 27 assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich
assigned to Fees and charges
Ofwhich 8 assigned to Fees and charges
Which 0assigned to Fees and charges
76
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Staff
grant

A.1.2. Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant; contributjon or service-level agreements
Table 15 - Additional external staff expected to be fnanced from grant contribution or service-levelagreements (39)
Human resources
2024
2025
2026
2027
External staff fnanced from agreements
Envisaged FTE
Envisaged FTE
Envisaged FTE
Envisaged FTE
Contract Aqents (CA)
3.5
2(40)
0.5 (41)
Dm
Seconded National Experts (SNE)
Dn。
Total external staff
3.5
0.5
pm。
A.1.3.
Other Human Resources
Table 16 - Structural service providers
Actuallyin placeas of
Structural service providers
31/12/2023
Infrastructure
Service Desk
Security
Registers (including OSS)
Other
Software management/development
Total structural service providers
8
Table 17
Interim Workers
Interim workers
FTEsin 2023
Total interim Workers
For the list ofagreements and further details on the split Of FTEs between these agreements, refer to Annex XI Plan for grant contribution or service-level agreements_
There is an ongoing amendment ofthe System Pillar grant, which should be fnalised by 04 2024. The number will evolve accordingly:
Ibid。
Service providers are contracted by
private company and carry out specialised outsourced tasks ofa horizontallsupport nature:
ANNEXI. HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUANTITATIVE
77

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
A.2.
Multiannual staff policy plan 2023-2027
Table 18 -
Temporary Agents
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Temporary 
Authorised budget
Actually flled 31/12
Authorised budget
Request of ERA
Request of ERA
Request of ERA
Agents
Perman。
Temporary 
Perman。
Temporary 
Perman。
Temporary 
Perman。
Temporary 
Perman。
Temporary 
Perman。
Temporary 
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
posts
AD 16
AD 15
AD 14
AD 13
AD 12
10
AD 11
14
20
20
23
24
AD 10
19
20
15
17
17
19
AD 9
19
19
32
28
26
21
AD8
24
21
12
19
17
AD 7
20
24
23
22
32
24
AD 6
25
24
17
18
1 |
10
AD 5
11 (43)
10
5
TotalAD
136 (43)
134
137
137
134
132
AST 11
AST 10
AST 9
AST 8
2(43)
AST
5
5
5
AST 6
5
AST5
9
AST 4
9 (43)
10
2
AST 3
AST2
AST
TotalAST
30
29
29
29
28
28
Total ASTISC
Total TAs
166
163
166
166
162
160
2 AST posts converted to ADas per MB Decisionn。 332
While the staff allocated for the SAP return Of post will only work part ofthe year before retirement;, the target Of reaching 162 TAs by year-end will be met
While the staff allocated for the SAP return Of post will only work partofthe year before retirement; the target Of reaching 160 TAs by year-end will be met.
78
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Table 19
Contract Agents
FTE
FTE corresponding
Contract Agents
corresponding
Executed FTEas
Actually flledas
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
to theauthorised
ERA staff (External personnel)
to theauthorised
Of31/12/2023
0f31/12/2023
2025
2026
2027
budget 2024
budget 2023
Function Group IV
23
22
23
24
24
24
Function Group II
Function Group
5
Function Group
Total
36
NIA
34
36
36
36
36
FTE
Contract Agents
FTEcorresponding
corresponding
Executed FTEas
Actually flledas
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
External staff fnanced
Grants;
to theauthorised
to theauthorised
0f31/12/2023
Of 31/12/2023
2025
2026
2027
Contrib. & SLAs
budget 2024
budget 2023
Function Group IV
3.5
0.5
Dm。
Function Group Il
Function Group
Function Group
Total
NIA
3.5
0.5
pm。
Table 20 - Seconded National Experts
FTE
FTE
corresponding
Executed FTEas
Actually filledas
corresponding
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
FTErequest for
Seconded National Experts
to theauthorised
0f31/12/2023
0f 31/12/2023
totheauthorised
2025
2026
2027
2023
budget 2024
Total
NIA
ANNEXI. HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUANTITATIVE
79
from
budget 

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
A.3.
Recruitment forecasts 2025 following retirement
mobility or new requested posts
Table 21
Recruitment forecast
Type of contract (Offcial, TA Or CA)
TA
Offcial 
Job title in the Agency
Due to foreseen
New post requested
CA (4) 
Internal
External 
retirementl
mobility
duetoadditional tasks 
Engagement of additional TA and CA (Project Offcers), taking into account the priorities from the Strengthening Plan Action Plan 2023-2027
Open posts for SNEs to be filled from Calls for expression of interest published on the Agency's website
CA posts for VAJERTMS depending on the outcome ofthe discussions
the EC
Foreseen retirement in 2025: 2 (ED, Project Officer AD 10)
Inter-agency mobility 2024:0
Function grouplgrade Of recruitment internal (brackets) and external (single grade) foreseen for publication
Recruitment Function Group (L,ILIlland IV)
80
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
With

Annex V.
Human
Resources 2025-2027
qualitative
A。
Recruitment (engagement) policy
A.1. Implementing rules in place
Topic
Model decision
Yes 
No
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015as per AB decision
Engagement OfTA
Model Decision C(2015)1509
(see below)
Applied by analogy since 02/10/2019 as per MB decision
Engagement ofCA
Model Decision C(2019)3016
(see below)
Applied by analogy since 25/06/2019 as per MB
Middle management
Model decision C(2018)2542
decision (48)
Applied by analogy since 25/06/2019as per MB
Type of posts
Model Decision C(2018)8800
decision (49), revised on 30/06/2023 (50)
The following general principles guide the application ofthe legal framework concerning
the Agency staff:
The core of the Agency staff consists of Temporary Agents.AIl Temporary Agent
positions have been identifed as long-term positions. Due to the budgetary and
establishment plan constraints the Agency is obliged to also engage Contract
Agents in order to fulfl its mission;
b) Temporary and Contract Agents are treated equivalently as far as possible。
In addition, it should be noted the Agency does not employ offcials. However; there are
cases Where EU officials have been engaged following an external selection procedure
and have therefore acquired the status ofTemporary Agent in the Agency (whilst remain-
ingan offcialon unpaid leave in their institution of origin)。
A.2.
Selection and engagement procedures
The procedure for selection and engagement ofTemporary Agents and Contract Agents
is based on Articles 27-34 of the Stoff Regulations and Articles 12-15 and 82-84 of the
Conditions Of Employmentof Other Servants ofthe European Communities (CEOS), the
related Implementing Rules on the engagement and use ofTemporary Agents and Con-
tract Agents; the Financial Regulation (Eyrgpeap Commissigns Erameworkand thaetofthe
Agency, the CogefGoog Administrative Behaviourand the data protection rules:
The Agency also makes use ofthe EPSO CAST lists accessible to Agencies for the engage-
ment Of Contract Agents. Because of the Agreement on the European Economic Area
nationals of Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein are eligible for working for the Agency.
The selection procedures for the engagement of Temporary Agents are carried out in ac-
cordance with OecisionN。 121ofthe Agmnistrative Board ofthe European RailwayAgen
MB Decision 09204on middle management staff
MB Decision n203 on typesofpostand post titlesin ERA
MB Decision 19326 on types ofposts and post titles
ANNEXV. HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUALITATIVE
81

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Cy laying down the general implementing provisions on the procedure governing the
engagement and use oftemporary staff under Article 2(f) ofthe CEOS。
Depending on the function and the level of tasks and within the limits authorised by the
establishment plan ofthe Agency, Temporary Agents are engaged at the following entry
grades:
AST
to AST 4forthe function group AST
AD 5 to AD8 for the function group AD
For managerial posts or highly specialised posts; the Agency can engage Temporary
Agents at
AD 9and ADIOorat
grade AD12 for Heads of Department。
The duration Of contracts for Temporary Agents is governed by Decision
Nc
ERA-ED-
DEC-1109-2015. Staff holding a long-term postare normally offered an initial contract with
duration of four years with the possibility of renewal. The standard practice for a frst re-
newalis normally for a two-year period and any further renewal is for an indefnite period。
For staff on short-term employment; the duration of the contract depends on the dura-
tion ofthe tasks to be carried out.At ERA, the duration ofthose contracts is predominantly
related to the availability and duration of grants; or to a specific time determined activity。
In very rare cases it is to cover
long-term absences。
The Agency is launching the following types of calls, published on ERAWebsites Recruit
ment portal:
Call for Interest (partial internal re-assignment): CFIIERA/.
Internal Mobility for Temporary Agents-Administrators: IMERAJAD/.
Internal Mobility for Temporary Agents-Assistants: IMJERALASTI.
Inter-Agency Mobility for Temporary Agents-Administrators: IAMIERAJAD/.
Inter-Agency Mobility for Temporary Agents-Assistants: IAM/ERAJAST/.
External calls for Temporary Agents-Administrators: ERA/AD/2021 /.
External calls for Temporary Agents-Assistants: ERAJAST/.
External calls for Contract Agents: ERACA/2021/.
A.3. Temporary agents
The ERARegylatign 2016/796 which entered into force in 2016 makes no distinction be-
tween posts for
term and short-term employment. Still a post can; in accordance
With Article 16 of Decision No 121, be defned to be for short-term employment when it
involves tasks ofa limited duration。
The decision to renew contracts of employment of Temporary Agents occupying a long-
term post is taken by the Executive Director based on two considerations: the continuity
ofthe post and the competences and performances of the jobholder, in accordance with
Decision NC
ERA-ED-DEC-678-2013 and the Procedure PRO_STA_O1 on the "renewal and
non-renewal of contracts of employment before the expiry date"
Ifa TA or former TA is awarded a second contract of employment in the same function
group;this contract shall be considered as a renewalin the sense of Article 8 ofthe CEOSf
the period between the end ofthe frst contract and the starting date ofthe new contract
is less than 6 months. Ifthe period between the two contracts ofemploymentis 6 months
or more orifthe new contract is in a different function group, the second contract ofem-
ployment shall be considered a new contract of employment
82
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
grades _
long-

A.4. Contract agents
The selection procedures for the engagement of Contract Agents are carried out in ac-
cordance with Decisionne 210 ofthe Management Board ofthe European Union Agency
on the general provisions for implementing Article 79(2) ofthe CEOS, governing the con-
ditions of employment of contract staff employed under the terms of Article 3a thereof
In accordance with Article 85 of the CEOS, contract staff can be engaged for a fixed pe一
riod ofat least three months and not more than fve years. Contract Agents are engaged
for their specific competence in different areas of administration (finance; HR, IT, logistics;
legal, audit quality management), in the railway domain or to perform manual or admin-
istrative tasks。
This type of contract is usually used to meet specifc needs such as:
Administrative tasks;
Coping With temporary peaks in Workloads;
Launching new activities for which long-term commitment in terms of staffng
is unclear;
Replacing staff on long-term absences such as maternity leave; long-term sick
leave Or
unpaid leave;
However; increasingly ERA has also engaged Contract Agents for other (long-term) tasks;
SUChas:
Administrative and Logistician Support Agents
Assistants
Project Offcers
A.5. Seconded National Experts (5)
Seconded National Experts (SNEs) are staff employed by a national, regional or local pub-
lic administration Or
public intergovernmental organisation Who are seconded to the
Agency so that it can use their expertise in
particular feld. SNEs are seconded
their national employer to the Agency's operational units on the basis of their specific
competency and technical expertise in the railway domain, based on Decisionn
173 of
the Management Board of the European Union Agency for Railways laying down rules
onthe secondment to the Agency of seconded national experts and national experts in
professionaltraining:
possibility to mandate 'cost-free' SNEs also exists; Where the Agency does not pay any
allowances or cover any ofthe expenses related to the performance oftheir duties during
their secondment although the Agency does not deploy such SNEs at the moment。
SNEs assist the Agency staff and cannot perform (middle) management duties. The initial
period of secondment may not be less than six months or more than two years. It may be
renewed once Or more Up to
a total
period not exceeding four years: Exceptionally, the
Agency's Executive Director may authorise one more extension of the secondment for
the maximum duration of one year at the end of the four-year period. Each secondment
and extension are subject to an exchange of letters. An SNE may be seconded once again
provided that the conditions of secondment still exist and a period ofat least six years has
elapsed between the end ofthe previous secondment and the new secondment unless
the previous secondments lasted for less than four years。
SNEsare not employed by the Agency
ANNEXV. HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUALITATIVE
83
from

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
A.6. Trainees
Professional traineeships last 10 months and are managed in accordance with Decision N。
ERA-ED-DEC-1063-2015, depending on budget availability。
A.7.
Structural service providers
At ERA, the majority of service providers are intra muros IT consultants。
B。 Appraisal and recassifcation
promotions
B.1. Implementing rules in place
Table 22
Implementing rules related to appraisal of performance and
reclassifcation / promotion
Topic
Model decision
Yes 
No
Applied by analogy since 03/31/2016 as per AB decision
Reclassifcation OfTA
Model Decision C(2015)9560
(see below)
Applied by analogy since 03/31/2016 as per AB decision
Reclassifcation OfCA
Model Decision C(2015)9561
(see below)
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015as per AB decision
Appraisal OfTA
Model Decision C(2013)8985
(see below)
Applied by analogy since 25/11/2015 as per AB decision
AppraisalOfCA
Model Decision C(2014)2226
(see below)
Concerning the performance appraisals and staff reclassification and promotions, the
Agency applies:
Qecsign Ne132 of the Administrative Board of the European Railway Agency
On
general implementing provisions regarding Article 87(3) of the Conditions of
Employment of Other Servants ofthe European Union
OecisionNe 133 ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency lay-
ing down general implementing provisions regarding Article 54 ofthe Conditions
Of Employment of Other Servants ofthe European Union
DecisionNe 122 ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency on
the general provisions for implementing Article 43 ofthe Staff Regulations and im-
plementing the frst paragraph of Article 44 of the Staff Regulations for temporary
staff;and
Qecision Ne123 of the Administrative Board of the European Railway Agency
on the general provisions for implementing Article 87(1) ofthe Conditions of Em-
ployment of Other Servants of the European Union and implementing the
paragraph Of Article 44 ofthe Staff Regulations:
They were first implemented for the appraisal and reclassifcation exercise Of 2016. Since
2016, the Agency adopted and implemented the rules for the reclassification of Contract
Agents。
84
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
frst

8.2.
Reclassifcation of temporary staff
Table 23
Reclassifcation of temporary staff
Average seniority in the grade among reclassified staff
Groupand Grade
Actualaverage over
Average over
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
5 years
5 years (52)
AD5
2.3
23
28
AD6
2.9
1.9
2.3
3.5
2.8
2.9
2.8
AD 7
4.5
4.6
1.9
2.6
3.7
4.2
2.8
AD8
3.7
2.4
2.3
3.5
3.9
3.4
3.0
AD 9
5.6
4.5
4.7
2.7
4.4
4.3
4.0
AD 10
58
95
6.1
4.3
4.6
5.4
4.0
AD 11
4.5
3.9
4.1
4.0
AD 12
3.9
3.9
AD 13
AD 14
7.9
7.9
NIA
AST
3.0
AST 2
3.0
AST 3
4.5
4.8
4.9
4.4
4.9
4.7
3.0
AST 4
3.9
3.9
3.7
3.8
3.0
AST 5
3.6
2.9
3.9
4.9
4.3
4.0
AST 6
5.9
2.9
3.9
4.5
4.0
AST
4.8
3.9
3.9
4.2
40
AST 8
5.8
5.8
4.0
AST 9
N/A
AST 10
5.0
AST/ISC
4.0
AST/SC 2
5.0
ASTISC 3
5.9
ASTISC 4
6.7
ASTISC 5
8.3
According to Decision C(2015)9563
Senior Assistant
ANNEXV HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUALITATIVE
85

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
8.3. Reclassifcation of contract staff
Table 24
Reclassifcation of contract staff (54)
Staffin activityat 
How many staff members
Average number ofyears in 
Average number ofyears in grade of
Function Group
Grade 
01.01.2023
Were reclassifedin 2023
grade of reclassifed staff
reclassifed staff (55)
18
N/A
N/A
Between 6and 10 years
16
1.6
Between 5and
years
CAFGN
15
3.6
Between 4and 6 years
14
3.9
Between 3and 5years
13
3
2.5
Between 3and 5years
12
N/A
N/A
11
Between 6and 10 years
CAFGIII
10
2.9
Between 5and
years
3
4.8
Between 4and 6 years
Between 3and 5years
N/A
N/A
2.7
Between 6 and 10 years
CAFGII
Between 5and
years
Between 3and 5years
N/A
N/A
CAFG |
4.9
Between 6 and 10 years
4.8
Between 3and 5 years
Staff fnanced from grant contribution or service-level agreements not included in this table
According to Decision C(2015)9561
86
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

8.4.
Mobility policy
Mobility within the Agency
DecisionN。 121ofthe Administrative Board ofthe European Railway Agency laying down
the general implementing provisions on the procedure governing the engagement and
use of temporary staff under Article 2(f) of the CEOS (adopted on 25.11.2016) and De-
Cision n
210 Of the Management Board of the European Union Agency on the general
provisions for implementing Article 79(2) ofthe CEOS, governing the conditions ofem-
ployment of contract staff employed under the terms of Article 3a thereof enshrine the
scenarios for internal mobility for TA 2(f) and CA.
The Agency considers internal mobility When vacancies arise; but due to the very specifc;
technical competences ofa big part ofthe staff internal mobility remains limited。
Furthermore; members ofthe Agency staff can apply for Vacant posts Within the Agency
advertised externally。
supplementary agreement in accordance With Article 10 ofthe
CEOS will be concluded as required if existing staff geta new job.
Mobility between Union Agencies
The implementing rules on the engagement and use ofTemporary Agents 2(f) and Con-
tract Agents defne the scope of mobility between EU Agencies。
very limited number
Of the support staff Who have left the Agency in previous years have accepted TAICA
positions in other Agencies:
Increasingly staff members Who took up long-term Temporary Agent positions at the
Agency come from other EU Agencies。
Mobility between the agencies and the institutions
Some posts are filled following an external selection procedure by staff coming from other
European institutions (in particular the Commission), although the number remains small.
ANNEXV. HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUALITATIVE
87

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
C。 Gender representation
C.1.
Datan 31/12/2023 statutory staff (only offcials, TAs and CAs)
Table 25
Data on 31/12/2023 - statutory staff only (offcials, TA and CA)
Establishment plan
Offcial
Temporary
Contract Agents
Grand Total 
Level
posts
Staff
96
Staff
% 
Staff
%
Staff 
% 
Administrator level (AD + CA FGIV)
30
18.496
20.69
37
18.89
Female
Assistant level (AST + CA FGHIII + ASTISC)
21
12.99
26.59
30
15.29
Total Female
51
31.39
16
47.19
67
34.09
Administrator level (AD + CA FGIV)
104
63.89
15
44.19
119
60.49
Male
Assistant level (AST + CA FGHIII + AST/SC)
4.996
889
5.690
Total Male
112
68.79
18
52.99
130
66.09
Total
163
1009
34
1009
197
1009
External staff fnanced
Offcial
Temporary
Contract Agents
Grand Total
from Grants, Contrib。 
Level
& SLAs
Staff 
%
Staff 
%^
Staff
% 
Staff 
% 
Administrator level (AD + CA FGIV)
2596
259
Female
Assistant level (AST + CA FGHIlI + AST/SC)
2596
259
Total Female
509
509
Administrator level (AD + CAFGIV)
2
5096
509
Male
Assistant level (AST + CA FGH-IlI + AST/SC)
)96
Total Male
2
509
509
Total
1009
1009
Table 26
Data regarding gender evolution over 5 years Of the Middle and Senior management (56)
2019
2023
Managers
Number 
%
Number 
%
Female
129
2
2096
Male
89
809
Total
1009
10
1009
Staff who is defned as middle manager by the
applicable General Implementing provisions on middle management
88
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

0. Geographical balance
D.1. Offcials, TAs,and CAs
Table 27
Dataon 31/12/2023 - statutory staff only (offcials; TAand CA)
Nationality
AD + CAFGIV
AST + CA FG HIII + ASTISC
TOTAL
Establishment plan posts
Number 
% Of total category
Number 
% Of total category 
Number 
% Of total category 
Austrian
0.69
0.59
Belgian
29
18.69
15
36.69
44
22.39
Bulgarian
0.69
0.59
Croatian
2.69
2.09
Cypriot
0.69
0.59
Czech
696
0.59
Danish
1.396
2.49
1.59
Estonian
Finnish
0.69
0.59
French
19
12.29
15
36.69
34
17.39
German
5.89
4.69
Greek
5.19
2.49
4.69
Hungarian
1.99
1.59
Irish
0.69
0.59
Italian
24
15.49
9.89
28
14.29
Latvian
9
Lithuanian
1.396
1.09
Luxembourg
Maltese
ANNEXV HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUALITATIVE
89

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Nationality
AD + CAFGIV
AST + CA FG HIII + ASTISC
TOTAL
Establishment plan posts
Number 
% Of total category 
Number 
% Of total category 
Number 
% Of total category 
Dutch
1.996
1.59
Polish
5.19
4.99
10
5.19
Portuguese
2.69
2.09
Romanian
10
6.49
4.99
12
6.19
Slovakian
0.69
0.59
Slovenian
Spanish
20
12.89
2.49
21
10.79
Swedish
0.69
0.59
British
1.996
1.59
Total
156
1009
41
1009
197
1009
Nationality
AD + CAFGIV
AST + CA FG HIII + ASTISC
TOTAL
External staff fnanced from
Grants, Contrib. & SLAs
Number 
% Of total category
Number 
% Of total category
Number 
% oftotal staff
French
33.39
259
Italian
33.39
259
Romanian
1009
259
Spanish
33.39
259
Total
1009
1009
1009
The AACC granted the Brexit exception to 5 UK Nationals as provided forin the Arts 12(2),47 and 119ofthe CEOS。
ERA may engage citizens from EEA states (Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway), but does not receive any applications from these countries:
90
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

0.2.
Evolution of 5 years of the most represented nationality in the Agency
Table 28
Evolution over 5 years of the most represented nationality in the Agency
Most represented nationality
2019
2023
Establishment plan posts
Number 
% 
Number
% 
Belgian
34
19.59
44
22.19
[。
Schooling
Noagreement is in place with a European School
Contribution agreements signed with the EC on type
European schools
No
Contribution agreements signed with the EC on type I European schools _
No
Informal arrangement with EEL(M) (Ecole europeenne Lille Metropole)
Number of service contracts in place with international schools:
Description ofany other solutions or actions in place:
Informal arrangement with Jehan Froissart Primary Schoolin Valenciennes (EN curricula)
ANNEXV HUMAN RESOURCES 2025-2027
QUALITATIVE | 91

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex VI.
Environment
management
A.1.
Executive summary
The revised SPD guidelines
require Agencies to compile and formalise their Environ-
ment management policy. To achieve this ambition, the frst Environment management
annex Was drafted in Which ERA summarised its commitment tohigher policy goals,
the measures alreadyin place, as well as the potential future environment man-
agement initiatives and actions, taking in consideration the responsibilities of the
Agency as a
public administration body, while keeping in mind the impact of environ-
mental initiatives on the Agency's limited human and fnancial resources. Despite these
limitations; the Agency is a socially and environmentally responsible organisation Which
pursues; whenever possible; the adoption and related implementation of environmental
measures and initiatives that can beachieved with the available means:
The Agency is committed to promote
culture of sustainability acting in a re-
sponsible and sustainable manner
See
point 9 ofthe European_Unign Agencyfor
Railways Policy (53). Concern for the environmentand promoting a broader sustainability
agenda are integral to ERA's professional activities and the management of the organisa-
tion. In addition, the Agency is committed to urgently respond, within the boundaries
ofits mandate and capacity; to the ongoing energy crisis。
The Agency's aim is to follow and to promote
sustainability practice, to reduce the
environmental impacts Of its activities and to help its stakeholders to do the same. The
Agency's existing environment principles
are covered under the following broader
topics:
Green building
(60
Climate protection
Environmental preferable purchasing
Transportation
Waste reduction and recycling
Sustainable resource management
ERAs wider work in the railway sector;, including its authority and policy contribution to
fully-fledged functioning Single European Railway Area;
is covered under the
Annual Work Programme, in particular Strategic Statement 2 (6
and the specific activity
"Green agenda" under programme 'Economic analysis and research' (ERA1188).
In addition to the broader policy context related to the Green Deal the Agency pays atten-
tion to the environmental impact of its day-to-day operations (ie. to its building, staff
management; administration, and functioning):
A.2.
ERAin the broader policy context related to environment
As an Agency Of the European Union; ERA pledges to the Commissions European
Greenpeal
initiative. Consequently, ERA commits to deliverits part ofthe dealto
make the EUs climate, energy transport and taxation policies ft for reducing net green-
Communication C(2020)2297 final of 20.4.2020 on the strengthening ofthe governance Of Union Bodies under
Article 70 ofthe Financial Regulation 2018/1046 and on the guidelines for the SPDand the CAAR
https://wwwera.europa.eu/sites/default/fles/
gencyldocsleyrgpeanungn
agency_forrailways_Policy
Ch
pdf
Currently covered in the latest Environmental
measures implemented at ERA status note (internal, 15/03/2022)
The Agency is considering
green building certifcation for its new headquarters building project (Certifcation HQE
Haute Qualite Environnementale)
Rail will become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport systemand will
be favoured as a transport mode by the new generations'
See https:lleceyrgpaeylinfolstrategypriorities-2olg-zoz4/eurgpean-greep-geal_ e
https://eceuropa.eulinfo/
strategyloriorities-20
9-2024/european-green-dealydelivering-european-green-deal
en
92
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
good

house gas emissions by at least 559 by 2030, compared to 1990 levels
as defnedin the
EUClimate Target Plan 2030 (3)一
Since the publication of the Communication from the Commission on the European
Green Deal (64) in December 2019, ERA has strengthened its activities aiming at promoting
the role ofthe railways in the decarbonation ofthe European transport sector. To make the
European Union the frst carbon neutral region in the world by 2050, lowering the trans-
port emissions is crucial. Between 1990and 2019, the transport emissions have gradually
increased and reached 2596 ofthe total greenhouse gas emissions ofthe EU.The transport
sectoris the second sector only to the energy sector in terms ofemission。
However, looking at the same period, the emissions ofthe railway sector have gradually
decreased and nowadays represent less than 0.59 of the transport-related emissions.In
addition, railways are also the mode of transport with the lowest external costs (external-
ities):
ERA has a central role in fostering interoperability and safety of the rail transport Which
should eventually make it more attractive, more efficient and thereby increase the modal
share ofthe railways, resulting the greenhouse gas emissions of Europes transport sector
in line With the objectives ofthe EC Green Deal:
Figure 2 - Sustainable mobility targets (Source: EC)
90%
reduction
greenhouse gas emissions in transport by 2050
Reducing its dependence
Making
Pricing to reflect
Oh
fossil fuels
alternative choices available
environmental impact
@(
By 2030, there
be at least
All large and medium-sized cities
The internalisation
30 million zero-emissions cars and
in place their own sustainable urban
of external costs
80 000 zero-emission lorries
mobility plans by 2030
of transport at the latest
in operation。
by 2050 will ensure
that those Who use transport
煦
Will bear the full
costs rather than leaving others
Traffic on high-speed rail
By 2030, there will be
will double by 2030
in OUr society to meet them。
at least 100 climate-neutral
By 2050 rail freight traffic
cities in Europe。
will double。
Scheduled collective travel
under 500 km should be carbon neutral
by 2030 within the EU。
Transport by inland waterways and
Short sea shipping will increase
Zero-emission large aircraft will
by 259 by 2030.
become ready for market by 2035
https:/myintracomm eceuropa eulnews/EuropeandBeyond /Pages/S5-Dercent-emissions-cut-planaspx httosl
eceuropa eu/climaleu-actionleuropean-green-deal/2030-climate-target-plan
Cn
Communication COM7201964O Tnalof 11.12.2019 from the Commission on the European Green Deal
ANNEX V
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
93
Will
put

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Figure 3 - Smart mobility targets (Source: EC)
8
OG
Unleash full potential
By 2030,integrated electronic
By 2030,automated mobility
Of data_
ticketing facilitates seamless multimodal
Will be deployed on large scale。
passenger transport
Freight transport will be paperless:
Figure 4
Resilient mobility targets (Source: EC)
Transport has been one of the sectors hit hardest by the COVID-19 pandemic. The EU has now an opportunity
to build a mobility system that is sustainable, smart, and resilient: a system for future generations。
Building
strong and resilient
Creating a mobility system
Ensuring the highest standards
Single Market:
that is fair and just for all:
Of safety and security
in European transport:
Investment in transport infrastructure
Make mobility affordable and accessible
across the EU Member States;
in all regions and for all passengers;
By 2050, the death toll
for all modes of transport
in the EU will be close to Zero.
By 2050,
fully operational, multimodal
Improve the conditions
Trans-European Transport Network
for transport workers
for sustainable and smart transport
with high speed connectivity.
ERAs wider work in the railway sector, including its authority and policy contribution to a
fully-fledged functioning Single European Railway Area, is reflected in all Agencys
strategic statements Which form partofthe Single Programming Document (multi-annual
and annual parts) The targeted conceptual work related to the Green agenda is captured
in Strategic Statement 2 (65)
In 2021, ERA led by example by having been one ofthe main organisers of EuropeanYear
CfRail 2021 (66),a flagship thematic initiative of the European Green Deal
On the highest level ERA also pledges to respect and act upon the United Nations
2030 Agenda_forSustainable_Development and the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).
"Rail will become the backbone that supports an environmentally sustainable multimodal transport system and will
be favoured as
transport mode by the new generations'
See https /leuropa.eu/year-of-raillinoex
Cn
https://eceuropaeu/commission/oresscorner/detaillen/FS_20_363
94
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

A.3.
Environmental impacts Of ERA activities
ERA's administrative operations related to its building(s) have direct and indirect impacts
onthe environment. ERAs impact on the environmentfalls underthe following categories:
Use of electricity, including for heating and cooling, water; paper and stationery
2
Generation of waste and CO_ emissions (including by travelling
commuting)
3
Land use with regards to biodiversity
ERA pays attention to limiting the use of resources, taking the energy crisis into account;
and
minimising negative impacts on the environment。
The recent geopolitical developments make the environmental
and in particular ener
gy-related issues
more
visible than ever before:
A.4. Accountability ceiling of ERA
ERAis committed to dothe utmost toadvance its environment management and neutral-
ise its impact on the environment. Nevertheless, it needs to be noted that due to outside
factors ERAs leverage may be limited regarding some proposed environment actions。
Current ERA headquarters building was put at the disposal of ERA by Valenciennes Metro-
pole through a rental contract. Other buildings (meeting rooms in Lille; parking) used by
ERA are rented in office buildings and parking lots, where the environment management
responsibilities and tasks lie with the property owner or manager. In the context ofthe
Covid-1g pandemic the Agency has re-assessed its approach to meetings with stakehold-
ers and has limited the use of office spaces in Lille; as well as the missions of ERA staffand
externals to Lille headquarters。
large number ofthe Agency's meetings have been held
in remote mode; thus reducing the carbon footprint。
Moreover; ERA's new headquarters building project has
key focus on environmental
considerations When setting up specifications and during negotiations: The new building
project complies with the EMASIHQE recommendations。
It has to be noted that the railway link With the adjacent Belgian city Of Mons is missing for
decades, with no rail service on the section between Valenciennes and the Franco-Belgian
border Despite recent plans brought back the hope for re-establishing the connection,as
of today this condition leaves no feasible public transportation option for the signifcant
proportion Of ERA staff living in Belgium. ERA remains a vocal advocate of recommencing
cross-border railway operations as defned in its Strategic Statement
(68), With a particU-
lar focus on this particular one. Nevertheless as of today, carbon footprint related to staff
commuting from Belgium to France needs to be mitigated with less desirable alternative
solutions; such as carpooling:
As per the EMAS regulation (Commission Regulation (EU) 2018/2026 of 19 December 2018 amending Annex IVto
Regulation (EC) No
221/2009on EMASJ. Note: the premises have Timited urban green space or accessible rooftop
to be considered for signifcant improvement ofits biodiversity:
"There Will no longer be any technical and operational barriers to the free movement of people and goods by rail
assets can be reused throughout Europe"
ANNEX V
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
95

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
A.5.
Environment management initiatives and actions completedin 2024
Action
Area
Target
Coor。 
Status
Additional information
A.Consumption ofresources
Priority was put on waste policy and adopting the
Promote the use of "personal carbon footprint tool
012024
MARS/SAC
Not done
(energy & utilities)
new indicators
A.Consumption ofresources
ERA has adopted 4 main indicators which will be
Perform
a carbon
footprintimpact of ERAs activities
032024
RSU/FM
On-going
(energy & utilities)_
used from 2024and expanded
B. Reduction ofcarbon
Explore the possibility to reimburse a part of local
ERA is planning to develop a more robust
footprint related to staff
042024
MARS/SAC
On-going
transportation pass
commuting
sustainable mobility policy:
ERA staff has been provided with an ERA cUp. Paper
Procure and distribute ERA-branded reusable Water
F Waste generation reduction;
012024
MARS/SAC
Done
CUps are not provided anymore apart in the canteen
bottles for staff to reduce disposable cup use
sorting and recycling
forvisitors。
B. Reduction ofcarbon
Carpooling module in sharepoint
footprint related to staff
022024
ERA club
Done
Module to facilitate carpooling among ERA staff:
commuting
B. Reduction ofcarbon
An internal communication campaign dedicated to
Bike internal communication campaign
footprint related to staff
022024
ERA club
Done
biking opportunities have been organised
commuting_
Corporate Social
ERAs blood donation campaign is made on a
regular
Responsibility (CSR), staff
Blood donation
02/2024
MARS/SAC
Done
basis. During the last campaign, 15 blood donors
involvement in environmental
and 4 plasma donors participated to the campaign。
issues
Innotrans is one ofthe most important railway event
D.Carbon footprint reduction
organised
tWO years in Berlin. For the frst time;
Innotrans by train
and management of missions;
032024
MARS/SAC
Done
special train service going from Brussels to Berlin
meetings and events
WaS
organised. ERAs staff participating to this event
have had the opportunity to go to Berlin by train.
ERA has launched an internal communication
campaign to remind the sorting and recycling policy:
The bins in the canteen have been reorganised. The
numberofthe bins in the offices have been reduced
Improvement of waste management
F Waste generation reduction;
022024
RSU/FM
Done
to one pertype (one for
recyclable and one for
sorting and recycling
general waste)
In addition, as part of the World clean-up
plogging event to collect garbage in the area of
ERA's HQ have been organised。
96
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNIAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
every
day

A.6.
Environment management achievements Of ERA until 2023
2023
Reducing temperature in the building as agreed/recommended by French author-
ities; With no possibility for additional electric heating devices
Repair/replace faulty sensors to solve lights always on in some offces
Reduce/stop heating and cooling in underutilised spaces; allow for settings man-
agementat office level
Adjust auto-off settings of lights, reducing light level whenever possible; add man-
ual switches for"hard off" (not even activated with motion sensor), consider lights
Off beyond working hours
Remove some neon tubes and/or replace them with LED in garage
Internal communication campaign on various topics such: energy efficiency
cling to work and composting
Purchase Of bike repair station (or repair kit With pump)
Replace bottled waterat events With alternative, less waste generating means
distributing ERA-branded reusable water bottles, order of returnable bottle prod-
UCts with a
deposit fee)
Include recyclable packaging in the criteria of the catering contract
Set-up Of ERA Environment (Volunteering) Group to drive dissemination actions,
collect ideas and push forthe progress ofenvironment actions
Promotion ofthe transition rally organised as partofthe European week ofsustain-
able development in Valenciennes
Blood donation organised with ERA staff
2022
Implementation
Of SYSPER having
in
View
the digitalisation of formerly
pa-
per-based processes and reduce paper use
Reduction in the number of missions and limited use ofthe Lille premises
Donation of old laptops to local charities and associations through the Mairie de
Valenciennes
2021
Introduction ofthe new SharePoint system
having in view the advancement of
DMS digitalisation and reduction of paper Use
Suspension ofstaff missions and in-house ERA events; only allowing the absolutely
essential ones, when possible; organising them online instead as
a Consequence
Of Covid-19 pandemic
Providing ERA branded cloth masks through Better Together initiative (to reduce
use Of surgical masks)
Reusable water bottles provided for the participants of the Rail Safety Days 2021
event instead of disposable cups
2020
Substitution ofthe purchase ofsingle use plastic cups for paper cups
Participation ofthe Agency at the Virtual EU interinstitutional Greening Network
meeting
Suspension ofstaff missions and in-house ERA events, only allowing the absolutely
essential ones; when possible; organising them online instead as
consequence
OfCOVID-19 pandemic
ANNEX V
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
97
(e9.

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
2019
Installation Of LED lighting systems in the HQ ground floor corridor
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
2018
Refurbishment ofall meeting rooms in the ERA HQ (installation of LED lighting
systems inside the MTG A131, 8003-B005, B016, 8017,and 8018).
2017
Installation of recycling stations for offces supplies in the ERA HQ
Purchase ofeco office supplies and LED desk lamps
Communal areas ofthe HQ refurbished With eco-friendly material
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
2016
Installation ofrecycling stations in the HO
Replacement ofold fridges With new ones consuming less energy
Deployment of power off scripts for laptops left powered on
Participation ofthe Agency at the EU interinstitutional Greening Network meeting
2015
Implementation ofrecycling and sustainable purchases via two catering contrac-
tOrs
Recycling workshop from the French local authorities to explain the recycling in
France organized by FM attended by colleagues within ERA (23/04/2015)
2014
Installation of the recycling station at the canteen, plastic Cup collection station;
plants in the reception and library, installation of recycling bins in the meeting
rooms atthe
headquarters
ERA started the
gradual introduction of paper orders that have environmentally
friendly label (Ecolabel/Blauer Engel), and also labelled FSC. By today ERA purchas-
es
products labelled "FSC Recycled" (manufactured with 10096 recycled fibre of
Which at least 85 percent is PCW
recycled material):
A.7.
Environment management initiatives and planned actions
Indicators
been adopted per main areas of actionsin 2024:
Total electricity consumption (including heating) + FTE;
Total water consumption + FTE;
Paper consumption
FTE;
CO emissions for missions + FTE;
Phytosanitary products used (fche de securite and fiche technique).
They will be reported for the frst time in 2024. New indicators are planned to be devel-
oped to have
more
comprehensive View on ERAs environmental impact. From 2025-
2026 onwards, reduction objectives will be agreed on.
The actions listed in the sections below which require a budget envelope Will start
with
budget estimate as
a pre-requisite. Budget availability will be assessed for
those actions before proceeding with the implementation。
2. Depending on the interest expressed for the volunteering group referred in part |,
this group can assist With other actions listed in parts A-.
98
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
have

3. While some ofthe units/teams are referred in the column ofresponsibilities by the
nature oftheir role in the organisation, the successful implementation ofthe strate-
gy relies on the ownership and involvement of all staff members:
A.7.1.
Consumption ofresources (energy & utilities)
ERA collects and analyses information related to the consumption of
electricityand water。
Pareto analysis ofenergy consumption will be conducted to pinpoint the critical points
to concentrate on and put efforts in frst. Based on this information, ERA will identify any
possible action to decrease the consumption.
List ofactions:
Action
Target 
Coordinator
Continue to procure green energy
rolling
RSU/FM
4.7.2.
Reduction of carbon footprint related to staff commuting
ERA to develop a sustainable mobility policyin 2025。
ERA Will analyse analogous schemes at Commission and other Agencies and evaluate the
feasibility Of providing local public transport passes to staff (or retrospectively reimburs-
ing Staff for these passes) to further encourage staff to use public transport and thereby
reduce their carbon footprint. The budget impact of such initiative should be properly
factored。
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Development of a teleworking regime that requires
in line with COM
RSUIHR
less office space (e.9. hot desks; rotational schedules)
reg。
4.7.3.
Green public procurement
ERA to further improve its procurement byimplementing green public
procurement. ERA to advance green public procurement by promoting the
useand order of"green offce items" from the EC offce supplies' catalogue。
Calls for procurement tenders ofrelevant goods and services should include "Environmen-
taland social contribution" among the technical evaluation criteria
decommissioned
furniture disposallre-use; recycling policy, donations). An "environmental impact state-
ment" will be written in the initial proposal for procurement and specifc; robust environ-
mental criteria, and "environmental considerations"
WilL be included in the calls for pro-
curement tenders ofrelevant goods, and services include. Tenderers Will have to comply
with these criteria and considerations to qualify for a contract. It is planned to become a
standard ERA practice to build environmental considerations into procurement for rele-
Vant goods and services
A.7.4. Carbon footprint reduction and management of missions, meetings and
eVents
ERA will promote and utilise the Commissions quidellines gngrganising_
Sustainable meetingsandevents. It has implemented MIPS+ module of
Sysper to replace MiMa and will compile regular reports on travel-related
emissions.ERA encourages environmentally friendlier itineraries in its
travel policy。
ANNEX V
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
99
(e9.

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
ERA
adheres
to
Commissions_guidelines
On
Org
Ianising_sustainable
meetings
and
events (9), and commits to promote the guidelines and incentivise to its staff to apply the
steps When organising meetings and events:
Step 0: Is a physical meeting/event necessary?
Step 1: Is the venue sustainable enough?
Step 2: Is the printed and promotional material sustainable?
Step 3:
the 3Rs
applied? (Reduce, Recycle and Reuse)
Step 4: Is the catering sustainable?
Step 5: Are the accommodation and transport environmentally friendly?
Step 6: Have social aspects been considered?
internal and external attendees to select train transportation where convenient connec-
tions are available; or air travel options With smaller carbon footprint (e.9. more direct
flight routes; less connections) . In addition, travel policy and related internal communica-
tions Will repeatedly emphasise to ERA staffthat online meeting forms should be preferred
and picked over travel intensive face-to-face meetings whenever feasible and expedient。
Internal discussions are on-going to include a new indicator related to the environmental
impact of meetings and events organised by ERA。
4.7.5。
Furtherreduction of paper and stationery consumption
ERA will continue to fully digitise Workflows.It will further reduce the
printouts of publications.In the limited cased of printers' use; ERA will
maintain the use of eco-friendly
partially recycled A4 printing paperas
a default printing medium. It will introduce on-demand stationery supply
instead of stationery "welcome package"
ERA Will advance further digitalisation of the Agency, including the replacement Of pa-
per-based processes with electronic Workflows and other IT systems
in cooperation with
the Commissions DG DIGIT
SUChas:
SYSPER (full rollout)
Microsoft SharePoint and Office 365: office solutions for paperless document cre-
ation and storing (full rollout)
Ares: document management and archiving system
ERA Will continue to reduce the number of printed (paper-based) publications through
close management of the communication & publication plan. ERA will increase the use of
print on demand of its publications/materials and web publishing:
ERA will raise awareness among its staff to on further possibilities of moving towards pa-
perless office. As part of it; instead ofthe usual stationery "welcome package" office sup-
plies Will continue to be stored in
designated offce and colleagues Will be invited to
collect strictly What they need
on demand。
4.7.6。
Waste generation reduction, sorting and recycling
ERA will maintain
orif possible; improve
the selective recycling and
waste collectionarrangements in its current building; as wellas in the
new
building. ERA will order offce supplies and merchandise onanon-
demand basis only; with preference to sustainablelrecycledleco-friendly
distributable merchandise。
New release: httpsJeceuropaeu/environmentemas/emas_for_you/news/news84_enhtm
100
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Are

ERA Will make sure that selective waste collection remains widely available in offices and
common areas ofthe current
building and undertakes to provide for the same in the new
building. In the form of internal communication, ERA will raise awareness among its staff
about these recycling arrangements。
Moreover; ERA has a partner to
recycle decommissioned ITequipment:
List ofactions:
Action
Target
Coordinator
Provide Ecocup to visitors and stop using paper cup
042025
MARS/SAC
A.7.7.
Reduction of offce space
List ofactions:
Action
Target 
Coordinator
Teleworking rules, including clear criteria for
in line with COM
requesting full time presence on premises;
RSUIHR
depending on the service needs
reg.
Flexible offce arrangement in the new building
in line With new
Discontinue Lille office rental when the current
RSU/FM
HQ project
contract expires
A.7.8。
Use of available green space; greening ofthe offces
List ofactions:
Action
Target 
Coordinator
Design in the new
building: planting native and high
CO2 conversion capacity plants, installing vertical
in line With new
garden
RSUIFM
HQ project
Propagation of indoor vertical gardens in the new
building
A.7.9. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), staffinvolvementin environmental
issues
List ofactions: (70)
Action
Target
Coordinator
Periodical intervention at General Assemblies to
CAP
inform staff about environmental topics
Annual CSR activities organised to staff (e 9. tree
planting, garbage collection, social volunteering)
Volunteering
and incentivising teams to choose "responsible"
Group
Better
team-building activities with added environ/social
Together
Value
Promote events at the level of ERA staff such as:
rolling
MARS/SAC
"green week" "green day" or"greener offce contest'
A.8. Current status and plan for certifcations and standards
ERA does not hold a certifcation for
ofthe
environmentlenergy management stand-
ards (e g.EMASIO_
4001, HQE; ISO50001). However, especially in the context ofthe new
building project ERA pays particular attention to the requirements listed in the respective
standards. The new building is planned to be EMAS
HQE certifed.
Subject to resource constraints
ANNEX V
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
101
rolling
rolling
any

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex VIl. Building policy
year 2025
A.1.
Current building(s)
Table 29
Current buildingls)
Surface Area (in m)
Rental contact 
Conditions
Host country 
Building name
Breakout
and
Location
Duration of the
attached tothe
(grantor
type
Offce space
Total 
Rent (Elyear)
Type
Clause
Offce
contract
breakout clause
support)
YIN
(ifapplicable)
120 rue Marc Lefrancq
year with tacit
ERAHQ
5.250 mz
N/A
5.250 m?
546620.28E
Offce rental
N/A
几0
59307 Valenciennes FR
renewal
LlleOfce_
meeting
299 Boulevard de Leeds
2
Espace_
67.00mz
1,50 m?
68,50m?
13865.00f
Until 31/12/2026
premises
NIA
00
SgooOLlle F
International
rental
Parking des
Tertiales
SPL
Rue du Fera Cheval 59300
100 parking
year with tacit
26250.00E
parking rental
N/A
门0
Valenciennes
Valenciennes; FR
places
renewal
Stationnement
5318.50m2 +
Total
5317mz
1.50 mz
5867365.281
100 parking
Notes:
ERA HQ (Valenciennes): ERA is the only tenant in the ERA HQ building, the Agency exclusively occupies and uses all offce and non-offce spaces in the building. Therefore, all surface area is included under the 5.250 m
Of office space (SHON, terraces are not considered).
2. Lille Office - Espace International (Lille): ERA shares offce spaces with the building landlord (CCI de Region) on the Znd floor. Following the signature of the addendum n"7 to main Lease contract that entered into force
as Of 01/04/2024,the leased total offce space is reduced to 68.50 m for a lease yearly fee of 13 865.00 E, where the "quote-part des parties communes" is 2.049.ERA has an exclusive use of the "offce space"
ofthe
67.0Om considered in the rent; the remaining 2.0496 included under"non-office"
are shared with the landlord and other tenants。
A.2. Building project in the planning phase
Due to the growth ofthe Agency, the current building in Valenciennes does not offer any longer the required conditions to accommodate staff and activities related to the Agencys role
35
railways' Authority. Therefore; the Agency has re-allocated the majority of staff members in double office spaces as
a short-term solution. Another short-medium term solution is the
The net office space being used exclusively by the Agency, namely the reception, cafeteria, meeting rooms, Offices, circulations, storage
technical rooms, copy corners inside ERA closed space:
Toilets
 sanitary installations; storage
technical rooms and circulations located outside ERA closed space and
shared with other occupants, including building common areas located on the ground floor main reception {parking places are
not consideredj。
102
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Non
being

implementation ofteleworking up to the limit set by the Management Board Decision on
Teleworking:
In parallel, as part ofa long-term solution, the Agency and Valenciennes Metropole have
started defning the requirements for a new building to accommodate ERA activities after
2028 by means ofa Study composed of different phases. In 2018, the Phase
ofthe Study
confrmed that the current ERA HQ cannot accommodate all requirements related to the
Agency activities and growth。
In 2019 and 2020, the Agency has managed to complete the Phases 2 and 4 of the tech-
nicaland functional study resulting in the approval ofthe technical specifications that will
be used as the base for the selection of architects in the Phase 3 ofthe Study。
Taking into account the experience gained during the pandemic With large-scale tele-
working and new Ways of working, the building capacity Was revised, and the technical
project adapted.
The main objective for the Agency during 2021 was to prepare the technical and fnancial
dossier to be formally addressed to the EU Budgetary Authority for the approval of the
New ERA building project。
In 2022, the Agency clarified with the DG MOVE, the EU Budgetary Authority, the steps
related to the procedure to be followed to have the project formally approved. On the
31/10/2022,
a letter Was sent to the EU
Budgetary Authority with the file as part ofthe
Early information procedure under Article 266(2) Of the Financial Regulation resulting in
the presentation on the 17/11/2022 ofthe ERA project to the Committee on Budgets in
Brussels, Where it was noted that the file submitted by ERA was very comprehensive and
clear. Following the exchange ofviews held in the meeting ofthe Committee on Budgets,
some follow-up questions asked by Members during the discussion were sent to ERA.At
this stage, the EU Parliament confrmed that the procedure "Information prealable" can be
considered as closed。
In 2023, Valenciennes Metropole decided to transfer the building project to the "Banque
des Territoires" that will launch the Call for Architects during 04 2023
012024 with the
purpose to be able to draft a Rental Lease Agreement proposal. However this option Was
abandoned in 04 2023 due to the higher costs presented by the "Banque des Territoires"
Inthe meantime, ERA restarted the negotiations directly with Valenciennes Metropole and
reached an agreement on a Rental Lease Agreement proposal
A.3.
Building projects submitted to the European Parliament
and Council
ERA presented the building project to the Budget Authorities Who gave their agreement
in April 2024.
One aspect to be clarifed in time is the funding ofthe new rental lease as the decision
falls under the next Multi-Annual Financial Framework as the new building will only be
available in 2028 at the earliest.
ANNEXVIL. BUILDING POLICY
YEAR 2025
103

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex VIl. Privileges and immunities
The Management Board approved the proposed Headquarters (or Seat) Agreement between the Agency and the host Member State without objections or negative votes in August
2018.(3) The Seat Agreement between the French Government and the Agency has been presented as draft legislation to the French National Assembly on 7 July 2021 (74) and has been
adopted and promulgated on 31 January 2022. The fnal text ofthe Seat Agreement can be found here (5). The following table presents the privileges granted to the Agency's staff: (76)
Table 30 -
Privileges granted to staff
Agency privileges
Privileges granted to staff 
Protocol of privileges and immunities
diplomatic status
Education
Care
The Agency's headquarters are located in Valenciennes and Lille. The French authority
The HQ Agreement differentiates statutory staff (officials; TAs;, CAs) and external staff
No provision
pledge to provide the necessary support to ensure the location ofthe Agency's
(SNEs, experts, trainees; interims). (Art. 1 ).
in the
headquarters will remain unchanged. (Art. 3)
headquarters
The privileges and immunities provided for the statutory staff aim to guarantee their
agreement
The Agency's premises are inviolable; exempt from perquisition, requisition
independence and the unimpeded functioning of ERA. The Executive Director and the
Please refer
confscation or expropriation_
No French authority can enter the building Without
statutory Staff (Art. 10):
to AnnexV
the prior agreement ofthe Executive Director. The property and assets of the Agency
enjoyimmunity from jurisdiction, even after the termination oftheir missionin
E_
Schooling
cannot be subject of legal measure of constraint without the authorisation ofthe CJEU.
respect of acts carried out by them in the exercise oftheir functions
for further
(Art. 4)
are exempt from national taxes on earnings, salaries and respective
supplements
information on
The Agency's archives and all offcial documents are also inviolable. The Agency will
paid bythe Agency
education。
beneft from the same treatment the French Government provides to diplomatic
enjoy the exemption for themselves and their spouses from measures restricting
missions when it comes to official communication. No restriction can be placed on
immigrationand
aliens' registration formalities;
neither offcial communication addressed to the Agency or a member of its personnel
enjoy the same privileges in respect of currency and exchange regulations
noron any communication emanating from the Agency. In addition, the Agency shall
comparably to those accorded to staff of international organisations
have the right to use codes and to dispatch and receive offcial correspondence and
enjoythe right to import duty-free their furniture and personal effects at the time
other offcial communications by courier orin sealed bags Which shall be subject to
Of frst taking up their post in France and the right on the termination of their
the same privileges and immunities as diplomatic couriers and bags. (Art: 5)
functions in France to export free of duty their furniture and personal effects;
subjectin both cases to conditions considered necessary by the French authorities
The Agency is entitled to display the
ofthe EU,as wellas its own on its premises
Enjoy the right to import duty-free their private car acquired whether in the country
and Vehicles (Art. 6)
oftheir last residence orin the country of which they are nationals; bound by the
single market rules. They also enjoy the right to export it
subject tothe
conditions considered necessary by the French authorities;
https:/Lwwwera europa eulsites/default files/agencyldocsldecisionldecision
0180_headquarters_agreement
between_agency
enghoststate_enpdr
Assemblee Nationale : https /ww assemblee-nationale frdyn/l5/textes/l1564323
Droel-ol
Senat : https:/Lwwsenatfrgossier-legislatiflpjlzl-2g8html
https:/Lwwassemblee-nationale frdyn/lS/textes/l1 564323
accorc-internationalpdf
http /ww Senat fr/rap/121-365/121-3651.ntml
104
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
day
from
flag
duty
free;

Agency privileges
Privileges granted to staff
The Agency, its assets, income and other properties; shall be exempt
all direct
Have access
along with their family members
to access Without discrimination
taxes. The Agency is also exempt from indirect taxes and duties included the price
compared with French citizens to all public services provided on French territory
of movable and immovable property and services, acquired for its official use and
including medical services, education, childcare, and housing:
involving an expenditure of at least E150.The exemption may be granted by way ofa
The French Government will deliver to all members ofthe Agencys personnel (expect
refund. The Agency shall also be exempt from all custom duties and any other taxes for
those who have the French nationality or permanent residency) a special residency
all goods intended for official use; as long as this exoneration is foreseen in the EUor
document identifying them as member ofthe Agency's personnel The Agency will
national legislation. (Art. 7-8)
ensure that once an
employee leaves the Agency, its residency document is handed
Finally; the Agency is entitled to registerthree vehicles with diplomatic plates. (Art. 9)
back to the Ministry Of Foreign Affairs. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs also facilitates
the issuance of those residency documents and work authorisations to the family
members ofall the Agencys personnel, expect those Who have the French nationality
or permanent residency (Art. 11 (1,2).
The French authorities will take all necessary measures to facilitate the entry, stay; and
departure of experts in missions for the Agency on the French territory. Necessary Visa
sand authorisations will be delivered for free as quickly as possible (Art. 11 (2,4)).
In addition, the Executive Director and the statutory staff are exempt from any
compulsory national social security system. External staff SNEs, and their family
members, subject to their coverage in their own country of citizenship, are also exempt
from any compulsory national social security system. (Art. 12)
ANNEX IIIl. PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
105
from

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex IX.
EValuations
The Agency has a system in place to monitor its performance and formalise an evaluation
ofthe results achieved in the year into the SPD dashboardas an ongoing tool, as well
a5
through the Consolidated Annual Activity Report Which focuses on the achieve-
ments of indicators and targets set out in the SPD:
The following instruments are used for collecting the data and for triggering actions:
Work progress reports, filled in by projects and service managers reporting the
status Of projects and services against the relevant plans, budget and human re-
sources allocation, including SPD targets。
Budget execution monitoring, a continuous activity based on a daily automat-
ed report fed with SUMMA data, displaying the level of appropriations; commit-
ments and payments to date for each budget line and for each project/service
Monthly management monitoring reports, analysing and reviewing staff
allocation, budget execution and riskslissues at projectlservice level
Monthly budget review meetings With the Management Team to analyse the
data
the budget execution monitoring and take timely decisions for deploy-
ing
redeploying the resources: The redeployment of resources is brought to the
attention ofthe Management Board for information ifthe transfers are within one
title or between titles but below the 109 threshold or for decision ifthe transfers
are between titles and above the 109 threshold.
IMCS, part of the internal monitoring programme aimed at verifying that pro-
cesses; projects, services and products comply with internal and external require-
ments, including:
IASaudits
ECAaudits
Non-Conformity register; Where deviations from the relevant rules and provi-
sions are recorded
AII the sources listed above allow the Agency governance bodies; namely the Manage-
ment Team and the Management Board to monitor continuously the functioning ofthe
Agency. In order to allow this, the Agency has developed a performance dashboard
Which is
turning the data into meaningful information。
The dashboard provides fgures, charts and visuals about:
Human resources (incl. information on statutory staff members, geographical
and gender balance)
Budget management
(Revenues and Expenditure;
with
breakdown
to
budget titles of budget envelopelappropriation and
amounts to date)
Authority tasks (incl. the number of SSCNATA applications received, number
authorisations/certifcations issued to date; planned and actual hours perau-
thorisation type)
Projects and services (incl. Budget and FTE planned Vs. actual, status traffc
lights With information on red status; overall cost analysis)
Strengthening Action Plan (SAP) (recruitment status; SAP policy priorities; SAP
milestones; budget execution)
Audits (status on open recommendations)
106
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
from
paid

Terminology
The following terms are used in the SPD
in accordance with the Commission
guideline
on evaluation:
Strategic Statement
is a coherent area of action with objectives and resources. It is
the basic building block for the structure of the annual Work Programme; distinguishing
between operational activities
directly related to the mission and core tasks ofthe agen-
Cy,and horizontal/ cross-cutting activities
carried out to support operational activities
and staff
Objective describes What the agency wants to achieve either in the short or long term:
Indicator is
characteristic or attribute that is measured regularly in order to assess to
What extent an objective has been met:
Baseline is the point of reference against Which achievement or progress towards objec-
tives is measured。
Milestone is an intermediate target set, expressed in quantitative or qualitative terms;
measuring progress towards the achievement of long-term objectives。
Target is the ultimate desired situation, quantifed and timed。
Inputs are the human and financial resources used and the time required to produce
outputs。
Actions are the Work carried out over a certain
period oftime; consuming resources and
producing outputs in accordance With the objectives set
Qutputs are What is directly produced or supplied through the agency intervention. They
often relate to the expected deliverables ofthe intervention and are identifed based on
its
operational objectives。
Qutcome is the envisaged medium to long term effects of a programme or policy out-
put. While its results are not easily foreseeable and might not be entirely in the sphere of
control of the Agency, the outcome represents an intermediate medium-term step be-
tween the agency' outputs and longer-term societal impacts. The Agency has structured
its multiannual work programme according to desired outcomes to ensure allof its out-
puts will contribute positively to its vision & ambition。
Results are the direct effects of intervention(s) on the target groups。
Impacts are the indirect or long-term effects ofan intervention on the EU or global socie-
ty that are, at least partly, expected to be influenced by agency's interventions。
Referred to as "Activity" in former SPDs
ANNEXIX. EVALUATIONS
107

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex X. Strategy
for the organisational
managementand
internal control
Systems
.
Context and background
To fulfl its mandate; the Agency relies on
robust internal control system that ensures
its
operations are efficient; transparent, and aligned with EU Financial Regulations. This
strategy outlines how Agency's internal control framework (ICF) supports its mission,en-
sures compliance with fnancial and regulatory standards; and mitigates risks that could
jeopardize the achievement ofits objectives:
In recent years; the
Agency has undergone several key transformations that impacted its
internal control environment:
Transition and implementation of the new corporate fnancial tool for managing
transactions. The new fnancial tool allows for better tracking Of commitments
payments; recovery orders;, improving budget managementand reducing the like-
lihood of errors. However; the shift to this new system requires strong controls to
ensure smooth integration, including staff training and system testing to prevent
disruptions.
The Agency is a recipient of grants from the European Commission (EC)
Which are used to fund key projects aimed at improving railway Safety and inter-
operability within the EU (including candidate countries) . Managing these
requires adherence to strict fnancial and operational rules, as wellas robust inter-
nal controls to ensure that funds are used efficiently and in line with their intended
purposes. The receipt Of grants imposes additional responsibilities on the Agen-
Cy to ensure compliance with grant conditions and EU fnancial rules. Enhanced
monitoring and reporting mechanisms, particularly through the new IT fnancial
tool Willensure that
funds are tracked and used effectively. Ex-ante and ex-
post controls will play a crucial role in verifying compliance with grant require-
ments and preventing misuse of funds
Revision ofthe Antifraud strategy. Recognising the evolving risks, particularly with
regards to cyberthreats, the antifraud strategy has been tailored to address the
Agencys specific operational environment which includes regulatory powers
with signifcant decision-making authority. It emphasizes the need to protect the
integrity ofits processes, especially in light of the growing reliance on digital SyS-
tems and external stakeholders。
Gradual introduction ofa new strategy/approach for ex-ante and ex-post controls
considering the above changes: The approach emphasises a risk-based approach
to control; where high-risk areas receive greater scrutiny. This allows the Agency to
fOCUS its resources on the most critical areas While
ensuring compliance With EU
Financial Regulations:
108
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
grants
grant

儿。 Objective
The objective ofthe strategy is to establish and maintain a robust internal control system
that ensures the effective; efficient; and economical use Of resources While safeguarding
assets and ensuring compliance with the Agency's mandate and ERA Financial Regula-
tions. This strategy is designed to mitigate risks that could hinder the Agency from achiev-
ing its regulatory and operational objectives, particularly in light ofnew developments
such as the introduction ofa new IT fnancial tool, the revised ex-ante and ex-post control
strategy, and the updated antifraud framework
川。
Scope
The strategy covers all financial, operational, and administrative processes within ERA,en-
suring that activities align with ERA financial rules and the Agency's regulatory framework。
The scope includes:
Financial transactions: all fnancial activities, including the management of grants
received from the EC, procurement payments, and budgeting:
Operational processes: processes related to Agency's core activities, including pol-
icy and authority tasks, and the integration of new technologies:
Compliance and risk management: ensuring that the Agency complies with appli-
cable rules and regulations; while effectively managing risks through a combina-
tion ofex-ante and ex-post controls:
Fraud prevention: addressing potential conflicts of interest; ethical misconduct;
and cybersecurity risks through the revised antifraud strategy。
While the internal control system is designed to provide reasonable assurance; it cannot
eliminate all risks due to inherent limitations. These include the complexity Of EU regu-
lations; external factors beyond Agency's control (e9. economic shifts; political chang-
es), and the reliance on accurate data input from external stakeholders. Additionally the
transition to new financial and operational systems requires time for full integration and
optimization, and temporary ineffciencies may arise during this process. it cannot com-
pletely eliminate the risk of error; fraud,or inefficiency. It is designed to mitigate these risks
t0
acceptable levels, considering cost-effectiveness。
IV。 Keyactors dealing withinternal control
Effective internal control within the Agency is a shared responsibility involving multiple
aCtors:
Management Board: Represents Member States and institutional stakeholders;
overseeing internal controls; risk management and the achievement of strategic
objectives. It plays a key role in approving budgets and plans, ensuring the overall
governance ofthe Agency.
Executive Director (ED): As the Authorising Officer (AO), the ED is ultimately re-
sponsible for the implementation and functioning of the internal control frame-
work. The ED sets the organizational tone; ensuring that internal controls support
Agency's strategic goals and compliance With regulations。
Heads of UnitslDepartment (AODs):
As
Authorising Officers by Delegation
(AODs), heads ofunits (HoU) are responsible for ensuring that internal controls are
effective and efficientin their respective areas. They must monitor risks, implement
mitigating actions, and ensure adherence to internal control processes:
Manager Of Risk Management and Internal Control: This middle manage-
ment position occupied by the HoU CAP oversees the internal control framework
ANNEXX. STRATEGY FORTHE ORGANISATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
109
key

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
and risk management processes, ensuring accurate reporting and implementa-
tion of control measures. This role is also key in facilitating the risk management
process across the Agency。
5 Accounting Offcer: Certifes the year-end accounts, providing reasonable assurance
that ERAs fnancial records present a true and fair view ofthe Agency's fnancial situation。
The accounting officer ensures compliance with accounting standards and fnancial regu-
lations.
5 Internal Audit Service (IAS): Conducts independent assessments of Agency's internal
control systems based on a three-year audit plan. The IAS provides recommendations for
improvement and ensures compliance With EU regulations。
5 European Court of Auditors (ECA): Perform independent audits Of ERAs financial
transactions and accounts,
ensuring legality, regularity, and proper use of funds。
5
AII ERA Staff: Responsible for adhering to internal controls Within their specifc func-
tions. Staff are expected to report any deficiencies or
irregularities, ensuring compliance
with policies and contributing to a culture of integrity。
V. Overview ofmain controls in place forthe fve control
components ofthe ICF
The ICF is structured around five key components; each supported by specifc control
measures that align with the recent
developments in IT, risk management; and fraud pre-
Vention。
1
Control Environment:
Tone at the top: The EDand middle management promote a culture ofaccounta-
bility, ethical behavior,and transparency. This is reinforced through policies suchas
the Antifraud Strategy and the ethical framework。
Ethics and Integrity: The updated antifraud strategy focuses on managing conflicts
ofinterest and promoting high ethical standards.AlIstaff must submit declarations
Of interests, and mandatory ethics training is provided.
Organisational structure: Clear lines of responsibility are established, with delega-
tion Of powers for executing the budget detailed in internal procedures:
2.
Risk Assessment:
The Agency has developed a risk management framework that identifes; assesses, and
mitigates risks across all areas Of its operations. The Agency maintains
corporate risk
register that is regularly updated to reflect new and emerging risks:
Risk management
processes are embedded within Agencys operational activities, including fnancial man-
agement project implementation, and regulatory oversight。
Risk Management framework: the Agency conducts risk assessments at the pro-
ject/ service level as wellin other specific areas such as IT, sensitive function. Most
signifcant risks are recorded in the corporate risk register, assessed both at inher-
ent and residual levels to ensure the effectiveness of controls。
otrategic and operational risk monitoring: the Manager Of Risk Management and
Internal Control ensures continuous monitoring Of risks; focusing on
areas
suchas regulatory compliance and fnancial management
3.
Control Activities:
Control activities are designed to manage risks and ensure compliance with key objec-
tives, including the legality and regularity of transactions; sound fnancial management
fraud prevention, reliability of information, and safeguarding ofassets。
110
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
key

Ex-ante and ex-post controls: the new strategy ensures that preventive measures
are taken before transactions are fnalized (ex-ante) and that compliance and ef-
fectiveness are reviewed after the fact (ex-post).
Financial Circuits: fnancial and budget procedures detail steps for implementing
fnancial transactions, the roles and responsibilities within financial circuits, and the
checks to ensure
legality and regularity:
Corrective/Preventive Actions: When systemic issues are identifed through ex-
post controls or audits; corrective actions are taken, Such as revising procedures
Or
retraining staff:
4. Information and Communication:
Information related to internal controls, risk management and fnancial transactions is
communicated to relevant staff through regular briefings, training sessions; and internal
reports:
Integrated reporting system:
monthly report provides management with
UP-
to-date information on project progress;, budget execution, risks, and corrective
actions. This system is connected to the new
fnancial tool- SUMMA, ensuring
accurate and real-time data reporting:
Budgetary status reports: regular budget reports offer a detailed view of budget
execution by unit and fund source; aiding in performance monitoring and early
identifcation of budgetary risks。
Statement of assurance: The E) is responsible for providing a statement Of assur-
ance, ensuring that all information regarding fnancial management and internal
controlis reliable; comprehensive; and complete. This is supported by reports from
the internal audit function, risk management assessments, and updates from the
accounting officer
5. Monitoring Activities:
ERA continuously monitors the implementation ofits internal control strategy through
Various mechanisms:
Audit Results: IAS conducts audits based on a multi-year plan;, providing independ-
ent assessments Of the internal control system. External audits are performed by
the ECA and other external bodies, focusing on fnancial compliance and the le-
gality oftransactions。
Recommendations follow-up: ERA closely monitors the implementation Of recom-
mendations from internal and external audits, ensuring that corrective actions are
completed within agreed deadlines。
Nonconformity analysis: Instances of nonconformities are analyzed to identify root
causes and prevent recurrence: Corrective measures are taken
as necessary to
strengthen the control environment。
ICF assessment: ERA produces an annual assessment report on the effectiveness
ofthe ICE The report is based on control activities, audits, and the outcomes of
ex-ante and ex-post reviews. All the internal control components and principles
must be present and functioning Wellat all levels ofthe Agency to be considered
effective. The results ofthe assessment are reported in the CAAR.
Through this comprehensive strategy; the Agency aims to maintain a high leveloftrans-
parency and accountability, ensuring that it can continue to meet its objectives While
safeguarding against financial, operational,and reputational risks。
ANNEXX. STRATEGY FORTHE ORGANISATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
111

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex Xl.
Plan for grant contribution,Or
service-level agreements
Table 31
Grant contributions, or service-level agreements
General information
Financialand HRimpacts
Date of 
Samount
Duration
Counterpart
Short description
2024
2025
2026
2027
signature
(EUR)
Grant Agreements
36 months
EU support on transposition and
Amount (EUR)
427.500
22,500
1.IPA Ill (2023/450-
19/12/2023
450,000
01/01/2024
DG NEAR
implementation ofthe EU railway
Ne OfCAs
05
0.5
0.5
269)
31/12/2026
acquis by ERA
ERA
IPA III
1 )
Ne Of SNEs
96 months
Implementation ofthe action
Amount (EUR)
2. EUMedRail
31/12/2016
2,000,000
01/01/2017
DG NEAR
EUMedRail
EuroMed Rail Safety and
Ne OfCAs
(ENI/2016/359-727)
31/12/2024
Interoperability Project
Ne OfSNEs
Amount (EUR)
427,500
22,500
Total Grant Agreements
Ne OfCAs
0.5
0.5
0.5
Ne Of SNEs
Contribution Agreements
45 months
Provide a fnancial contribution to
Amount (EUR)
205,550
System Pillar
DGMOVE
fnance the implementation ofthe
(MOVE/C4/SUB/2021 -
15/07/2021
750,000
16/07/2021
SRD.3
action ERA support to the Railway
Ne OfCAs
1.5(79)
454/512.852702)
01/05/2025
System Pillar
Ne OfSNEs
2.Technical support
Amount (EUR)
600,000
to Railway safety and
12 months
Technical support on the deployment
Ne OfCAs
interoperabilityin
02/09/2024
600,000
01/07/2024-
DG REFORM
ofthe European Rail Traffic
Greece (REFORM/
30/06/2025
Management System in Greece
Ne OfSNEs
1M2024/019)
There isan
ongoing amendment; which should be finalised by 04 2024.The number will evolve accordingly。
Ibid
112
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Generalinformation
Financialand HRimpacts
Date of
Samount
Duration
Counterpart
Short description
2024
2025
2026
2027
signature
(EUR)
3. Pilot project - Single
Amount (EUR)
395,250
395,250
European Railway
Support the generation of knowledge
Ne Of CAs
Area
Prototype
and invaluable lessons with the goal
30 months
ofaccelerating the completion of
Corridor Munich-
16/10/2023
790,500
31/10/2023-
DGMOVE
the Single European Railway Area,
Verona (MOVE/
30/04/2026
in particular for the Rhine Alpine rail
Ne Of SNEs
C2/5UB/2022-499/
corridor between Munichand Verona
512.903563)
Amount (EUR)
,200,800
395,250 (80
Total Contribution Agreements
Ne OfCAs
1.5 (81)
Ne Of SNEs
Service-Level Agreements
Amount (EUR)
1.N/A
Ne OfCAs
Ne Of SNEs
Amount (EUR)
Total Service-Level Agreements
Ne OfCAs
Ne OfSNEs
Amount (EUR)
1,628,300
417,750
Total
Ne of CAs
3.5
0.5
Ne of SNEs
There is an ongoing amendment ofthe System Pillar contribution agreement; which should be finalised by 04 2024.The total will evolve
accordingly。
Ibid
Ibid。
Ibid
ANNEXXl. PLAN FOR GRANT, CONTRIBUTION, OR SERVICE-LEVEL AGREEMENTS
113

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Annex XII. Strategy
for cooperation with
third countries and/
Orinternational
organisations
Since the adoption Of the existing strategy for global cooperation (together with SPD
2018), the Agency has been updating and aligning the scope of work in order to best
address the priorities listed by the European Commission in this feld, namely:
The EUtransport policy aims at promoting greater development and stability in the neighbour-
ing countries, enhancing connectivity with the neighbouring areas and towards Asia,and cre-
ating a level-playing feld for international rail transportand the rail supply industry beyond EU
borders. The Commission Welcomes Agencys aspirations to provide technical support at Com-
mission request The Commission reminds that the main priorities as regards rail international
cooperation fall into EUs neighbourhood, strategic partners and high growth economies be-
neighbourhood and international organisations. Agencys international activities should
notgo beyond:
114
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
yond

AnneX XIll。
Procurement plan
Table 32-
New procurement procedures to be launched in 2025
Title
Description 
Date
Market ceiling
Type of Contract
Procurement of datasets for economic analyses including impact
Railway economic data sets
assessments, ex-post evaluation, reporting on progress with Safety and
01
30,000.00E
Direct contract
interoperability as wellas upcoming studies
Prepayment Stand space InnoTrans 2026
In order to secure the stand space; it is booked and paidn year
28,000.00E
Direct contract
FWC for technical assistance in the ERTMS unit:
Support to cover the needs for ERTMS expertise on analysis Of ESC
Technical Assistance to ERTMS Unit
reduction;
01
120000.00E
Framework Contract
Support for ERTMS activities to be executed under Grant Agreements
(Greece)
support to ERTMS staff in assessments
Table 33
Planned use in 2025 of existing ERA framework contracts
FRAMEWORK CONTRACTS
To be committedin 2025(estimated)
Local Identifer
User Reference
Expiry Date
ERA 202102 FWC-01
Consultancy support on Vehicle Authorisations applications
06/01/2026
350,000.00E
ERA 202121 FWC 01
Fournitures objets promotionnels
10/08/2026
10,000.O0E
ERA 202202 FWC 01
Development oftraining products for the EU agency for railways knowledge hub
31/08/2026
154,500.00E
ERA 202205 FIC-01
Technical assistance to ERTMS trackside approval
21/05/2027
34.500.00
ERA 202301 FWC-0I
Interpretation services
24/07/2027
100,000.00E
ERA 2024
FWC-0l
ESISDID
02/09/2028
490,500.00f
ERA 202419 FWC-0l
ESP EISD7
31/07/2028
1,100,000.00E
ERA 202420 FWC-Ol
Event management services
8/08/2028
565,000.00E
TBD
Catering services
31/12/2028
35,000.00E
The FWCcallis
fnalisedin 04 2024, the local identiferis therefore not
available:
ANNEX XIIL. PROCUREMENT PLAN
115
being
yet

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Table 34
Planned use in 2025 of existing inter-institutional framework contracts
FRAMEWORK CONTRACTS 
To be committedin 2025(estimated)
Local Identifer
User Reference
Expiry Date
ESMA 2022 02 ICTCONSULTANCY
ESMA 2022 02 ICTCONSULTANCY
18/10/2026
970,000.00E
SIDEIIIDPS
SIDEIIIDPS
14/09/2027
207,000.00E
DGITSLA
DGIT SLA Appendix A-9
No end date
250,000.00E
Travel Agency
PMO
Tender procedure PMO/LUX/2024/OP/0004
31/12/2028
100,000.O0E
DGCOMM
(86
COMM/2024/01/OOXX Thematic Comm Services
31/12/2028
100,000.00E
This FWC is not yet signed but the Agency plans on participating in 2025.
(8}
Ibid
116
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

Annex XIV. Strengthening
Action Plan
A.1. Context
In 2022, the Agency's Management Board adopted the Strengthening Plan prepared by the Agency in close cooperation
with the European Commission. The purpose ofthe Strengthening Plan is to make the strongest possible case in order
to strengthen the Agency With resources matching the level of ambition necessary for achieving the important
EC policy objectives for rail, inan effective and effcient manner; and beneft from high levels ofambitionand
effciency within ERAS structure and methods。
With the document serving as
basis for the internal EC budget negotiations in 2022, the Agency received
proposed
increase Of 12 TAs in 2022. While the additional TA allocation is lower compared to the request from the Strengthening
(12 TAs proposed out ofthe 22 TAs requested), it can offer a good basis for the Agency to proceed with the imple-
mentation ofthe Strengthening Plan。
very important challenge is represented by the fact that the additional TA allocation needs to be fully covered under
the existing subsidy envelope. To make best use of this TA allocation and
considering the external constraints related to
the indexation of salaries and prices, the Agency is making a thorough assessment of its capacity to cover these costs in
sustainable manner until the end of MFF 2021-2027. Several measures are envisaged, such as the time-phased hiring of
the TAs. The budget constraint on the subsidy side is therefore an element to be properly monitored and managed forthe
Whole remaining period ofthe current MFE:
The current document describes the plan of actions Which the Agency will put in place in the period 2023-2027 in order
to implementthe Strengthening Plan, taking into consideration the level ofadditional staff allocation proposed bythe EC:
It is hereinafter referred as SAP (Strengthening Action Plan) 2023-2027. This builds on actions already taken up to present
to increase the efficiency ofthe support services and tools。
A.2.
What we want to achieve
ERAhas established an outcome-driven framework placing strong emphasis on effectiveness (i.e. "doing the right things"),
in line With the prioritisation of activities included in the Strengthening Plan. In parallel,a delivery structure based on pro-
grammes has been established. Outputs of programmes are followed up and measured using a dashboard approach。
With the Strengthening Plan, we willimplement a series of improvement actions that should enable to achieve the most
appropriate outcomes with the resources available. This is important not only to justify the additional resources requested
bythe Agency, but also in orderto demonstrate that European taxpayer's moneyis used in the most effective Way, so that
the European railway system can develop towards attractiveness, efficiency, and sustainability:
Improvement actions Will be assessed according to their impact as well as ease of implementation. Quantitative targets
are defned (mainly related to the respective FTEs) and followed up/measured on a regular basis. The baseline is ERA SPD
2022,and the monitoring tools are ERA SPD Portfolio Management together with the SPD Dashboard developed already:
A.3. Objectives, actions, indicators, and targets
The SAP 2023-2027 mirrors the Strengthening Plan and translated it into concrete actions. It is based on the planning
and monitoring framework and enablers already set up by the Agency, Which includes:
the multi-annual planning in the SPD, with a clear focus on the intervention logic;
the Agencys performance dashboard, including reporting to the EB and the MB
the regular budget execution monitoring and reporting
the Consolidated Annual Activity Report。
ANNEX XIV. STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN
117
Plan

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
The annual work programmes will therefore be aligned to the priorities listed in the SAP
which represents an anchor for the multi-annual planning in what the priority policy areas
are concerned.
direct tracking Of SAP-related FTEs, outputs and targets
be includes
in the SPDS
The SAP 2023-2027 is organised along the following components/objectives:
Drive an optimal resourcing of policy priority areas, matched by proportional out-
puts and outcomes; including effciency gains
b)
Maintain proper resourcing and further efficiency gains for the authority tasks
Ensure a reduction in the Agency's administrative FTE allocation while
maintaining
regularity and legality
Ensure the overall
projected FTE evolution by 2027
Ensure effective and effcient budget management (planning and execution), ap-
propriate risk management
4.3.1.
Ensure an optimal resourcing of policy priority areas, matched by propor
tional outputs and outcomes, including effciency gains
Note: In addition to the balanced inputloutput ratio for the priority areas, efficiency gains are
also embedded and measured with the same indicators. The latter represent the delivery ofrel-
atively more (ambitious) outputs for the same amount of effort compared to previous _
118
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
will
years。

2022
Target
Action
Indicator
Pg code
baseline 
2023 (87)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A1.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA1224
4.62
4.93
(annual values)
A1.2.No.of NSA audits
performed peryear
Report on
fndings
from second 2nd
A1.3. Proper learning
the
Follow-upof
Follow-upof
Optimised scope
Optimised scope
NSA monitoring
NSA monitoring
defciencies ensured
defciencies ensured
implemented
implemented
Al. Ensure proper
Cycle delivered to
input/output for NSA
MB Report
monitoring
To be includedin
A1.5 Observation OfNSA
Pilot during the Znd
the NSA monitoring
supervision activities
(89
yearofthe Znd cycle
service when
relevant
A1.6 "Monitor"NSAsin EU
accession countries (synergies
ERA1224
with IPA grant and TCT) after
IPA countries accession"
A2.1 . No.of FTEs allocated
ERA1224
4.01
(annual Values)
A2.2.No.of NoBo audits
performed peryear (full
8-9
15
15
20
20
20
monitoring cycle in 3 years
A2.Ensure proper
20 NoBos/year) (90)
input/output for
NoBo monitoring
Dissemination at
RISK NB Rail
plenary
42.3. Learning from NoBo
NSA network
monitoring
EA (European
Accreditation)
workshops; webinar
For 2023 we work with the assumption thatall 12 additional TAs are distributed across the priority areas; however
correction factor (0.5) needs to be applied to the additional TA work capacity hired in 2023 (in terms Of FTE), which corresponds to
the late hiring during the year The numbers included in the 2023 column are already calculated with this correction factor。
This indicator captures the speed of progress with organising the NSA audits; a complementing indicator is included in the SPD to measure the number Of reports issued。
Not to replace the NSAs supervision, but to assess the performance OfNSAs while carrying out supervision activities (e.9. follow up type 3 issues by concerned NSAs)
This indicator measures the speed of progress with organising the NoBo audits; a complementing indicator is included in the SPD to measure the number of reports issued.
ANNEX XI. STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN
119
from

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
2022
Target
Action
Indicator
Pg code
baseline 
2023 (87)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A2.4 Anew common
framework for NoBos, DeBos
Final draft agreed
and AsBo assessment and
with ECas a basis for
First concept drafted
monitoring set up by the
3 future legislative
A2.Ensure proper
Agency (new legal base may
proposal
input/output for
be needed)
NoBo monitoring
A2.5 "Knowledge hub" to
To be started at the
promote best practices and
end ofthe 1st NoBo
train NoBos (widening it to EU
audit
accession countries)
A3.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA1218
10.35
11.22
13
13
13
13
(annual Values)
CCS TSI change
A3.2.CCSTSI
Maintain and
requests developed
enhance CCS framework
from EC-mandate
according to plan
A3. Ensure proper
43.3. Support forthe EU-wide
Requests of CINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
Requests of CINEA-
Requests OfCINEA-
input/output forthe
deployment of ERTMS, (e9:
DG MoVe 1009
DG Move 1009
DG
1009
DG 1009 Move
DG 1009 Move
ERTMSand radio
byCINEA)
assessed
assessed
assessed
assessed
assessed
communication
A3.4 CCS TSI Maintenance
Publication ofCCS
evolution
and operational activities for
TSI Application
CCS Framework
guide
CCSTSI Article 12
analysis delivered
roadmap
roadmap
A3.5 review Of ESC/RSCand
ESCIRSC roadmap
according to the
implemented as
implemented as
roadmap for reduction
proposal
deadline setin art。
planned
planned
12 CCSTSI
A4.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1175
4.5
5.94
(annual values)
Harmonised
A4.2. Lessons Learned
CCM process
implemented in CCM process
A4.Ensure proper
implemented
input/output for the
1009 ECrequests
10096 of CRs created
TSIs related Work
A4.3.TSI Programme
Implementation
considered by ERA
forthe TSI revision
implementation
proposal
and allocated to a
package 2026
CRWorkfIOW
closed
A.4.4.CR Unique
Specifc Cases for
Authorisation
Coaches
120
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
Cycle。
Move

2022
Target
Action
Indicator
Pgcode
baseline 
2023 (87)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A.4.5.TSI
programme
Progress report
to RISCatJune
implementation
meeting
AlInew EN referred
A4.6.CR Standards
TO EN updates
toin TSIanalysed
A.4.7.CR Platform/Train
Closed
interface
A.4.8 CR Noise of parked
Closed
tralns
A.4.9.Energy measurements
Closed
A.4.10.CR RIV/Dangerous
Closed
goods
A.4.11.CCM ready for
CCMready byend
CCMimplemented
processing System Pillar input
of02
forall requests
509ofthe
509 ofthe
A4.Ensure proper
A4.12. EN standard
mandatory
mandatory
input/output for the
management
Provided
references Of ENs in
references OfEN'sin
TSIs related Work
TSIs assessed
TSI's assessed
A.4.13.TSIs as global
International
International
standards
Strategy _
1st Draft
Strategy:
Final
A.4.14.Support to EC (TO/
Advice/Derogations/ NoBos)
10096
10096
1009
10096
10096
delivered according to the
procedure
New TSI OPE
A.4.15. Increased
structure fnds
Proposal for new
New structure/
Phased
Phased
harmonisation of operations
general acceptance
TSIOPE structure
approach defned/
implementation of
implementation of
defne new structure for TSI
(strategy paper
submitted to EC
agreed
new structure
new structure
OPE
development on
andWP
restructuring)
A4_
6 CRon Rear-end signal
Closed
A4.17.TSI Dissemination
Workshops
ANNEX XI. STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN
121

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
2022
Target
Action
Indicator
Pg code
baseline 
2023 (87)
2024
2025
2026
2027
A5.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1172
4.28
7.36
7.8
7.8
78
78
(annual values)
ERA-PRG-00G
1009 ofthe VA NRs
1009 CRs created
positively assessed
forthe TSI revision
A5.2.NRs to include in TSIs
CRs introduced
339 CRs Closed
byend 2024 to be
package 2026
transferred into TSIs
Closed
CRs
A5. Ensure proper
1009 OfSRD
1009ofSRD
1009 Of SRD
input/output for the
A5.3. Increased performance
notifications
notifcations
notifcations
clean-up of national
ofand trustin MS as control
Project fnalised
1009 ofplanned
assessed with TO
assessed with TO
assessed with TO
rules (91)
level
Manage NSRs cleaning-
(through agreement
MS assessed (incl.
when relevant
When relevant
When relevant
Up process 2.0 (compliance
with MS and/orthe
impact ofearlierTO
respecting the
respectingthe
respecting the
with TSIOPE 2023,incl.
issuing OfTO)
ifrelevant)
ERA Regulation
ERA Regulation
ERA Regulation
impact OfTO,if relevant)
deadlines
deadlines
deadlines
A5.4.Increased performance
Draft new regulation
OfSMS
draft new regulation
Draft new regulation
and develop
Delivertraining
Delivertraining
for harmonisation OfType 5
guidance/ training
NSR
A6.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1219
3.5
4.18
5.5
4.5
55
5.5
(annual values)
ERA1226
AG.Ensure proper
input/output forthe
At least
steering
At least
steering
At least 1
steering
Implementation
CSMASLP work
A6.2. Management ofthe
GOA meetings
OfGOA workplan
committee meeting
committee meeting
committee meeting
stream
organised & 5
organised & 5
organised & 5
Group of Analysts (GOA)
Chaired
during CSMASLP
subgroups and
subgroups and
subgroups and
phase |
plenary meetings
plenary meetings
plenary meetings
In 2023, the Agency and the EC are putting together
practical implementation plan to address the acknowledged need for harmonisation in assessing and cleaning all the categories of rules (vehicle; Fl, safety/operationalj . Once agreed, the
milestones ofthis plan will be reflected in an update ofthe indicators for SAP 2023-2027 and SPD 2024, respectively。
To be delivered through ERA1 249
Ibid
Itis important that a dedicated source of funding be identifed for the business description and the setting ofthe ISS tool,as wellas the support for the Group of Analysts; in the absence ofthat the outputs ofthe Work from the CSM ASLP work-
stream risk to be Iost
122
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

2022
Target
Action
Indicator
Pgcode
baseline 
2023 (87)
2024
2025
2026
2027
Report on the
machine to
machine pilot for
data exchange
A6.3. ISS development (1)
With national/
company systems;
including Agency
recommendation for
future development
Assessment ofthe
solution toallow
accurate and full
A6.4.ISS development (2)
data history (who
changed whatand
When in the data)
Formal publication
ofa legally valid
A.6.5.ISS development (3)
AG. Ensure proper
Ontology for CSM-
input/output forthe
ASLP
CSMASLP work
Publication of
stream
frst versionand
Technical Opinion
maintenance of
On Annex
updated
A6.6.CSM development
mandatory Technical
according tothe
Documents;
lessons learned
including support to
ISS development
A6.7. Support to CSM
09 ofanswers
09 ofanswers
8096ofanswers
ASLPand ISS customers to
deliveredin 10
deliveredin 10
deliveredin 10
populate and consume data
working
working
working
FAQ based on the
implementation of
the CSM developed.
First Version
Operators voluntarily
guidance available
A6.8.CSM guidance/ training
implementing the
and presented by
Training delivered
Training delivered
CSM identifed
GOA working groups
questions collected,
forapproval
answers drafted and
published。
ANNEX XI. STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN
123
days
dayS
days

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
2022
Target
Action
Indicator
Pgcode
baseline 
2023 (87)
2024
2025
2026
2027
Normal: one normal
Normal: one
Normal: one
Normal: GOA
Normal: GOA
procedure ("cross
normal procedure
normal procedure
proposal & ERA
proposal & ERA
wind") completed
completed
completed GoA
A6.9.GOAIJNS
follow-Up report
follow-up report
Fast track:
fast
Fast track:
fast
Fast track:
fast
Fast track: GOA
Fast track: GoA
track procedure
track procedure
track procedure
proposal
proposal
completed
completed
completed
ERA.1227
A7.1. No.of FTEs allocated
ERA.1226
3.44
7.32
7.32
6.22
55
5.5
(annual Values)
ERA-REC-122
A7.2.Migration plan forthe
individual registers to a linked
Migration plan
data approach, including
Draft migration plan
fnalised, based on
the standardization of
prepared
legal requirements
terminology through the ERA
and business cases
terminology _
A7.3. Migration of registers to
A7. Ensure proper
knowledge graph approach
2596
1009
input/output for the
(no code needed anymore)
digitalisation of
Agency's registers
A7.4. Progress with the
Specifcations
specifcations for multi-leg
fnalised
ticketing
A7.5. Agency becoming a
Proposal for EC
Workflows putin
registration entity for vehicles
decision sent
place accordingly
at EUlevel
A7.6. Exploratory work for
Eurocontrol for railways;
Draft concept paper
including the traffic
developedand
managementand economic
discussed with EC
regulation aspects
ERA1226 is included in the services contributing to the policy goal specifcally through their workstream on digitalisation, excluding the daily running of the registers。
124
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

A.3.2
Ensure sustainable
resourcing and further efficiency gains for the authority tasks
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
81.1. No.Of FTEs allocated VA excluding CTT
11.7
11.7
11.7
11.7
11.7
81.2. No.of FTEs allocated VA CTT
5
4.8
48
4.5
4.5
81.3. No.of FTEs allocated SSC
5.2
5.1
4.9
4.8
4.8
81.4. No.of FTEs allocated ERTMS TA
1.51
15
1.4
1.4
1.4
81. Ensure sustainable resourcing
forthe authority tasks
81.5. Proportion Of FTEs allocated to authority
7596
7596
759
7596
7596
tasks which are billed
81.6 Overall FTEs redeployed from
authority to policy areas
cumulative
-3,87
-4.21
-4.51
-4.91
-4.91
values compared to 2022 baseline
961
82.1. Internal mid-term review ofthe matrix
Mid-term review
Follow-Up actions
organisation supporting authority tasks
82. Ensure a 1st review ofthe
(including ADICAIAST split)
performed
implemented
authority related processes
82.2. List of identifed improvements fora
List consolidated
List consolidated
future legal framework update to be provided
and shared with EC
and shared with EC
to the EC
4.3.3.
Ensure areduction in the Agency's administrative FTE allocation
Note 1: This objective is referred to the administrative FTE allocation but encompasses
Wide scope (e.g. redeploying administrative posts to operational activities, redeploying technical staff who
currently cover administrative tasks to operational tasks activities).
Allreferences are to FTEs (not posts) to allow for counting savings and/or redeployments which account for partitions ofone FTE:
Note Z: The sequencing is thought as follows:
Creating the capacity Of potentially free FTEs through process leaning, including automation
as Such; this does not account for a materialised saving, but is a pre-condition (step
C2)
ii
Identifying the opportunities to materialise that capacity 一
this can
happen at contract end points (step C3)
i。
Having the FTEs freed from administrative work needs to be followed up by their actual redeployment in operational areas (step C4)
This reflects the re-visited assumptions for the use Of ERA FTEs forVA, SSC, ERTMS TA compared to 2022 and also embeds
component of efficiency gains through simplifcationlautomation of processes_
ANNEX XI. STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN
125

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
C1.1. Workload analysis for all processes
C1. Process/deliverable/job
(operational and support) based on a
Delivered
Updated
related workload analysis
consistent methodology
C1.2. Workload analysis at job level
Draft
Finalised
C2.1. % of previously documented
processes leaned , including through
2096
2096
2096
2096
209
automation
C2.2. %ofnewly documented processes
leaned by design, as part ofthe Agency's
1009
10096
10096
1009
1009
management system linked to ICF
C2. Creating room for
C2.3
No.Of FTEs saved by leaning
administrative FTEs capacity
secretarial HR IT fnancial services
Part of overall target
Part ofoverall target
Partof overall target
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
and administrative functions linked to
below
below
below
below
below
operational Work
C2.4.No.Of FTEs saved from optimising
the Agency's portfolio (clustering P/S into
Part of overall target
Part ofoverall target
Partof overall target
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
Pgs, resorting to off-the-shelf
products
below
below
below
below
below
etc)
C3.1. No ofadministrative FTEs not
C3.
Materialising the FTE
Part of overall target
Part ofoverall target
Partof overall target
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
replaced (e9.after retirement; invalidity
capacity gained
below
below
below
below
below
procedure; leaving the Agency etc)
C4.1. Training programme for the
Strengthening Plan put in place as part of
SetUp
Maintained
Maintained
Maintained
Maintained
the Agencys Learning and Development
plan
C4.2.No.ofadministrative FTEs retrained
C4. Redeploying the capacity
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
through the SP training programme;
to operational activities
below
below
below
below
below
redeployed to operational activities
C4.3.No.oftechnical FTEs directly
redeployed from administrative tasks
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
Partof overall target
Part of overall target
Part of overall target
to technical work without the need for
below
below
below
below
below
training:
C5.Overall FTEtarget part
C (non-cumulativeannual
-0.5
-1.25
-0.5
targets)
Baseline should be defned as a first step。
126
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027

A.3.4. Ensure projected FTE evolution by 2027
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
01. Control the FTE
01.1. No.of additional FTEs deployed to policy
trend evolution by
priority areas
cumulative values compared to 2022
+11.23
+17.92
+15.82
+14.10
+14.10
2027
baseline (based on part Aabove)
D1.2.No.Of FTEs redeployed from authority to policy
tasks
cumulative Values compared to 2022 baseline
-3,87
-4.21
-4.51
-4.91
-4.91
(based on 81.6 above)
01.3. No.of FTEs gained through effciency measures
cumulative Values, calculated based on the annual
-0.5
-1.75
-2.25
-3.25
-4.25
Values from C5 (98)
01.4. Re-assessment ofthe additional FTE needs for
Prepared and agreed
policy activities
with EC
01.5. Gate way review ofthe targets
Done
Done
01.6.Input provided to EC for the next MFF
Provided
negotiations
any future Railway Package
A.3.5
Ensure effective and effcient budget management
Target
Action
Indicator
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
E1.1 . % ofsubsidy appropriations committed
Min. 989
Min. 989
Min. 989
Min. 989
Min. 989
Max. 109 fOrTI
Max。 109 forT1
Max. 109 forT1
Max. 109 forTl
Max. 109 forT1
E1. Effective budget
E1.2. % of carry forward to the next year
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
Max. 2096 forT2
Max. 209 forT2
management
Max. 309 fOrT3
Max. 309 forT3
Max. 309 fOrT3
Max. 3096 forT3
Max. 309 forT3
E1.3. Salary gap structurally addressed
Done
Done
Done
Done
[2. Effcient budget
[2.1 . Real term savings in the support expenditure
29
29
29
29
29
management
(IT FM)
This trend is based on the assumptions on FTE evolution for
authority tasks as listed in line B1.6. Should the trend evolve in another direction, there will be
need to revisit the targets for 81.6,C5and D1.1in a coordinated manner
ANNEX XI. STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN
127

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
A.4. Governance and monitoring arrangements
The SAP 2023-2027 is endorsed by the Management Board and steered by the HoU CAP
underthe coordination ofthe ED。
Adedicated Task Force is put in place forthe period 2023-2027 to support the Action Plan
implementation; composed of:
HoU CAP (Oana Gherghinescu)
CAP team members
Thomas Willems, Koen Favyts; Marta Lenarcik, Andrei Lixan-
dru)
representative by unit; selected and nominated by the corresponding HoU, fol-
lowingan internal call for expression of interest (organised in Sep 2022)
Heads of Units/Heads of Departments will be accountable for their respective contribu-
tions. The involvement of the individual members in the Task Force is envisaged on a part
time basis, in addition to their daily tasks at the Agency。
Regular reporting is envisaged as follows:
Internal regular iterations with the Agency's Management Team
A dedicated section will be set Up as part of the SPD Dashboard to monitor the
progress ofthe indicators listed in Chapter 2 ofthis document by 二
Ofreference
The SPD Dashboard is presented at every regular EB and MB meeting, Which offers
the possibility to MB members to regularly monitor the progress with the action
plan implementation
A gate review with the Management Board can be envisaged
tWO years tO
make the necessary updates to the Action Plan, depending on the evolution in the
internaland external context ofthe Agency。
Annual reporting as part ofthe CAAR
Synergies with the Better Together and the HR strategy Work streams Will be carefully en-
sured by the Task Force:
A.5.
Risks
The following risks are identifed and assessed according to the matrix below:
Very likely
5
Likely
3
4
5
Likelihood of
Possible
2
3
4
4
consequence
Unlikely
2
2
3
4
Unlikely
2
3
3
Negligible
Minor
Moderate
Signifcant
High
Impact
They will be monitored and addressed as part of Agency's risk register。
128
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
year
every
Very

Budget related
Risk
Riskassessment
Mitigating measures
The Agency is carefully monitoring the budget execution to strike the
optimal use ofthe existing resources in the spirit of sound fnancial
1.The Agency might not be in the position to hire all 12 TAs in 2023 due to subsidy constraints. The
inflation trend poses
signifcant pressure on the Agencys capacity to cover the salary costs in the
management While flagging
warning signals in case of subsidy
gaps. We
react by an agile approach, having reserve lists in place
absence of sufficient additional EU subsidy。
but only conclude employment contracts when the
budgetary means
are available
2. The revenues from Fees and Charges are not under the full control of the Agency. In particular;
the volume of work can fluctuate due to seasonal trends during the year, but also more structurally;
upwards (e:9.the need for re-certifcation following DAC deployment; go-everywhere trains etc ) or
downwards (e.9. starting with the second round of safety certification forthe same RU at ERA, the
complexity ofthe issues and checks might drop compared to the frst round)
Human resources and internal communication related
Risk
Riskassessment
Mitigating measures
3. The changes in the working patterns;, together with the fnancial consideration for hiring at lower
grades, might limit the attractiveness for the specialised technical jobs offered by the Agencyin
the future. This might hamperthe business continuity, talent pool retention and by consequence
Agency's capacity to deliver the technical outputs envisaged in this plan_
The Agency will indeed tackle this aspect with attention; by
4.Inherent internal communication sensitivity around the choices made as part ofthe action plan
highlighting and supporting the opportunity of ensuring career paths
(non-replacement redeployment etc ). In addition, given this internal redeployment, the pressure on
from administrative tasks to operational tasks. Natural end-of-contract
legally binding administrative tasks Will increase exponentially。
gate reviews will be used.
Output related
Risk
Riskassessment
Mitigating measures
5.With insufficient additional resources for the policy tasks, Up to the full level ofthe need, the
Agency might not be in the position to support the ECin responding to all standardisation areas
linked to innovation over the next years. The allocation of additional resources might need to be
reopened during the lifecycle of this Action Plan to identify priority areas for Which the Agency's
involvement is further expected.
6.
Considering the complexity of the training program which could help redeploying administrative
staff to operational tasks, it might have a limited buy in and/or efficiency and could require a period
oftime for completion which goes beyond the timeline ofthe Strengthening Plan:
ANNEX XI. STRENGTHENING ACTION PLAN
129
early
will

Multi-annual programming 2025-2027
Other
Risk
Riskassessment
Mitigating measures
7.In 2021, the Agency received a
forits System Pillar workstream . While the grant provides
Ensuring a multi-annual continuity ofthe contribution agreement and
the Agency with 3 FTEs to cover forthis work until May 2025. In the absence ofan extension;
an internal coordination ofthe system pillar work directly linked to the
there is a risk of business continuity for this stream ofactivities
Railway System activities (ERTMS. TSIs, Safety):
130
EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILNAYS. SINGLE PROGRAMMING DOCUMENT 2025-2027
grant

Getting in touch with the EU
In person
Alloverthe European Union there are hundreds of Europe Direct centres。
You can fnd the address ofthe centre nearest you online
(european-unioneuropa.eu/contacteulmeet-US
en)
Onthe phone orin writing
Europe Direct is a service that answers your questions about the European Union. You can
contact this service:
by freephone: 00 800 678 910 11 (certain operators may charge for these calls);
at the following standard number: +32 22999696,
Via the following form: eyrgpean_yioneyrgpaeycontecteylwrite_ys
e_
Finding information about the EU
Online
Information about the European Union in allthe official languages ofthe EU
is available on the Europa website (eurgpean_ynioneurgpaey:
EU publications
You can view ororder EU publications at op.europa.eulen/publications。
Multiple copies offree publications can be obtained by contacting Europe Direct oryour
local documentation centre (european-union europa.eu/contacteulmeet-Us
en)
EU law and related documents
Foraccess to legal information from the EU, including all EU law since 1951 inallthe offcial
language versions; go to EUR-Lex (eyrlexeuropaey):
EU open data
The portal gata eurgpaey provides access to open datasets from the EU institutions, bodies
and agencies. These can be downloaded and reused for free; for both commercial and
non-commercial purposes. The portal also provides access to a wealth of datasets from
European countries_

European Union Agency for Railways
120 rue Marc Lefrancq
BP 20392
FR-59307 Valenciennes Cedex
Tel +33 (0)327096500
eraeuropaeU
Twitter@ERArilways
Moving Europe towards a sustainable and safe railway
system without frontiers。
EUROPEAN
Publications Office
UNION
of the European Union
AGENCY
FORRAILWAYS