IRSE / 
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Back to bbasics: train protection
Questions for the Certificate (Module A) will not be set
on the text which has been struck through
Effective from October 2023 exam
David Fenner
This, the fifth article on 'back to basics'
Supporting the driver starts with providing clear
themes, covers the subject of train
and concise signal indications so there is no
protection. The fundamental requirement
confusion in the meaning and limited opportunity
Ofa
railway signalling system is to ensure a
to read the wrong one
One can wonder how
train movement can be completed with the
drivers could see a dim oil lamp flickering behind
minimum of risk from human error, while
coloured lens as they approached many of the
at the same time allowing as many trains
mechanical signals stillin service;
at least in the
as
possible to run on a given infrastructure。
UK until as little as 15 years ago. Many years ag0,
Much of the focus of a signalling engineeris
drivers had the advantage of a dark sky with the
on the design of the infrastructure control
general absence of town and street lighting. Now
system that ensures safe routing of the trains
of course most signals are colour lamps but often
and supports the person responsible for
against
a much
brighter background. The problem
that activity, the signaller. But the other
is how do we help the driver respond to those
operative is the driver。
signals and What other support do we need to give
them to limit the number of accidents. There are
The history of railway signalling is very often about
tWo main errors
a driver can make:
the development of systems to prevent the wrong
"The driver
signal being given to a driver and the evolution
Failure to control the speed ofthe
is constantly
of the technology that underpins that function.
train correctly.
Relatively little relates to supporting the driver,
Failure to
at the defined End of
making
although it would be wrong to assume there is
Authority (EoA).
judgements
none
It is Worth
considering the different roles to
Itis these functions a train protection
about the safe
see ifthere is any underlying reason for this.
The
system must address。
signaller is dealing with
a fixed set ofequipment
movement of
that has a limited range of states and thus a limited
The remainder of this article Will start by
theirtrain"
set of options
The requirement is to set specific
examining the various types of train protection
routes at given times to permit the safe passage of
and how those may affect the performance of the
train,and to be reminded which of those actions
railway. It Will then provide a generalised review
have yet to be completed. The driver on the other
ofthe development of systems to outline the
hand is constantly making judgments about the
requirements With examples of systems from the
safe movement of the train based on information
UKand other countries
from their own route and train performance
knowledge; signs at the trackside and the signals
Warning or protection
seen. And in the case of signals seen these can
Within the overall scope of train protection there
and often willbe
changing minute by minute as
are two main sub divisions, warning systems
other traffic moves
So the computational task of
and protection systems。
warning system Will
assisting a driver is significantly more sophisticated
normally be associated with the location at which
than that required to support a signaller. Maybe
braking should commence Whereas a protection
this is Why train protection systems seem to have
system willaim to stop the train at or soon after
evolved more slowly, with the sophistication of
the End of Authority (EoA).A warning system
train protection requiring computing power akin
Will alert the driver to take note of information
to a processor not a logic box.
presented from the trackside and may initiate
10
BACK
TO
BASICS
key
StOP
key

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020

Supporting the driver
braking action if the driver fails to acknowledge
investmentin
comprehensive trackside ATP
by relaying accurate
the warning. After acknowledgement the train is
installation. Many of the systems introduced
information in the caband
usually solely under driver control.
A protection
prior to the turn of the century (2000) can be
reducing the possibility
system Will enforce
a brake application should
considered to be ofthis form
of mistakes being made
has been a long running
the system detect the train is being driven outside
focus of the command,
Safe parameters. There are several sub-divisions
Train protection with intermittent update
controland signalling
Of protection systems. It should be noted there is
These systems continuously monitor the
industry. The view may
overlap between some of these classifications。
movement of the train to ensure it is within the
have improved from the
safe envelope. The driver is provided withan
steam era to the modern
Train stops
indication of the current maximum safe speed but
(as shownabove)
Probably the most basic but effective form of train
otherwise drives to the signals and signs observed
but increased speed and
protection, train stops are typically mechanical
at the trackside
The train picks up information
traffic complicates the
situation
devices that trigger a brake application f passed
about the infrastructure ahead including the
Photos Westinghouse
When in the 'protecting' position. They are
traffic conditions at intermittent intervals, usually
BGS Archive/
usually associated with
signal. Atrain
from a balise or beacon or from inductive loops
Chippenham Museumand
Will ensure the train comes to
halt at
braking
laid in the track. The intermittent intervals are
Shutterstock/aapsky。
distance beyond. To be effective in eliminating
usually associated with a signal, to facilitate the
accidents they require an extended protected
inclusion of information about the extent ofany
length of track beyond the signal, which limits
current movement authority and any speed limits
application to lines with relatively low top speeds
associated with that authority:
(around 8Okm/h) and good brake performance
These systems provide full supervision ofthe
typically metros
There are two fundamental
driverat all times and will intervene to reduce the
weaknesses with such systems; firstly,
train speed back within the safe envelope prior to
reduce capacity because the extended overrun
returning control to the driver. The exception to
distance increases the headway between trains,
this is in the event of a Signal Passed at Danger
and secondly;
do not address the issue of
(SPAD) when
'trip' state is entered and the
overspeed at other locations_
There have been
train is brought to
halt. The systems normally
applications Where timed release of train stops is
Train stops
include roll back protection, a function ofmost
used to monitor speed, especially approaching
reduce capacity
buffer stops or high-risk junctions, but
are
ATP systems, to prevent the train rolling away
when brakes are released but traction power
because
difficult to implement successfully。
is not
extended
Intermittent train protection
Because the system only receives intermittent
overrun distance
Intermittent train protection is provided at those
updates, the system may restrict track capacity
increases
locations assessed to pose
significant risk. These
because the train must be driven according to the
the headway
are usually junctions with substantial traffic Or
last update received and may thus continue to
particular layout that creates additional risk, for
enforce a
reducing speed even though the signal
between trains"
example Where there is a chance of head-on
ahead has changed to
a less restrictive aspect. A
collision. As a train approaches such sites it passes
means of partially overcoming this constraint is
through a speed trap and ifabove
pre-set speed
to have 'infill' in the form of loops oradditional
Will experience a forced brake
application。
balises which augment the update frequency,
In more recent systems it will be fed information
especially approaching critical signals。
about the current conditions and then calculates
One advantage of such ATP systems is, because
the safe speed profile to be followed.
the train is being driven on conventional signals;
Modern systems of this type usually require
the system can be overlaid on the railway to
the fitment ofan Automatic Train Protection
enhance safety. It is thus possible to partially
(ATP) system to the trains but avoid expensive
equip either or both track and trains with only
11
J

O
day
stoP
StOP
they
they
they
applied。

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
selected portions of the route and chosen trains
elsewhere is a typical example. If a distant
being protected. One disadvantage with this is
signal is approached with a clear indication the
that an unfitted train Which SPADS, may encroach
driver receives a bell (or gong) sound and is free
on the path of a fitted train, resulting in
a serious
to continue_
Should the signal be at caution
accident. Thus, this arrangement would ideally
the sound is a buzzer (or horn) and the driver
only be used as a migratory configuration
must
acknowledge this both to turn off the
sound and prevent a brake application. After
Train protection with continuous
acknowledgement the driver is responsible for
These systems have the facility to provide updated
the continued motion of the train. These basic
movement authority information at any time_
functions are almost identical to the French
Consequently, they are often part ofan in-cab
"Crocodile" system_
signalling system because the driver is continually
fed information on the current safe speed and is
Iisfnterestingto note howthetechnology ef
no longer required to watch for lineside signals
this-system has-ChangedThe basic system Was
OI
signs. There may be other reasons, outside
deveteped bythe Great Western Raiway triatled
the scope of the signalling system, for the driver
IA i90GanoHmpterented shortlffaftertafds
to watch the passing trackside and one ofthe
aeross thefrAetWOK Aitially the EOIHACatIOA
challenges is to ensure the right balance is struck
betweentracKandtraA aSatampHthetrack
between watching the displays in the caband
NtHaH eleetreal feedtotndfeate CtearandAo
watching the line_
etectrieat charge NHeHAt CaHtOATHIs fotoWs
the "fafl safe" prfneipte because theabsence ef
Another challenge with these systems is that the
etectriefty EotldarseA seterat faflufe sfttations
driver is given advice on the safe speed profile
whereasthe +echanicattifting ofthe contaet
based on the train parameters encoded in the
shoe woHle fail mteh tess often The probtem
"Ifthese
system. If these parameters are wrong the driver
wtha mechanical contact systeris-wearand
may be advised to brake later in the journey than
tearespeciallyas speedand freGueneyofuse
parameters are
is desirable; With the risk of passing the End of
Ahcfeasesas Has fhettabte AHeH Autttpte Aspeet
wrong the driver
Authority (EoA)
the equivalent ofa SPAD. This is
SgHaARG ANASHbeCame COmIOAThe forf ef
may be advised
of particular concern for variable formation trains
ANSAmpemented by British Railways fromthe
especially locomotive-hauled freight trains-
but is
49505 uses Aagnetie fnduetionto conveythe
to brake later
also relevant at times when adhesion is poor。
sghal statustathetrafh Buringthe 19505 +hen
than is desirable"
thesyster Masbeinginstalled-sericondueter
The major advantage of
systems is the ability
to enhance the capacity of the infrastructure.
dewees were Aet sothe edHpHeHt eHthe
Because the train and infrastructure are in regular
traihHsedfelaysToday thetogic ts performed
contact,and with
a Safe
speed display in the cab,
baPLCandthe Hagnetic fete-deteetedbya
the limitations of fixed lineside signalling with
HattEffeet seHser
limited number of aspects can be removed.
ANS HsesapermaAent Hagnet Centratl tecated
Thus, a fixed block railway is no longer limited
betteenthe falstefhtiatethe enboafd SstefA
to say four or five aspect signals, meaning closer
andprovfde the dryer Wth atarhing ffthe
running is possible and,
more importantly,
signatis at caution or stopAnelectromagnet
release of trains held at a converging junction
is posttionedtmmediately afterwards where a
Can
happen significantly earlier With
short
SigHatHay showatine CtearaspeetTHis second
block sections
This form of protection is a
Hagnetts energised tHenthe signats Clear
corner stone of moving block systems and the
fgreentand effectiyely Cancets the AarniH;
heart of Communication Based Train Control
instead soHndingabetlnthe cab fsee FgHre 升
(CBTC). Metro railways have been able to
THe FreneHh "Crocodtle" System COHVeys the tWO
significant uplift in service frequency as a result
messages frortheinfrastrueture tothetraihn by
Of such application, for example the Victoria line
Afferent vottagesapptiedtothe "Crocodile" HaHR
in London increased from around 30 to 36 trains
Eollectedy aNre-brush Onthe dring vehiete
per hourin the peak as
a result of
implementing
Hechanteally Contacting the HaHR:
CBTC. Continuous update train protection
thus offers enhanced performance and options
fo enstrethe tHO sHCCessfte Haghetsare
for reduced trackside equipment as wellas
deteetedattow speedthe System delays Output
improved safety, making the business justification
tothe drterforapproxtHatelf one secondafter
measurably easier。
passingthe permanent HagnetThis protdes
te fora sloy mowngtraih to detectthe
The advantages ofin cab signalling and increased
etectromagnet priortefnitiating the WarAIHG
capacity by removal of lineside signals usually
seGHeACe.tthengtes the drveraroundthree
means either all trains must be fitted with
secondsto acKAoWedge aarIHgandObsere
suitable system orthe configuration of existing
thesgAal ffAoaeknowedgement s feeefed
signals needs to be amended to allow changes
tebrakes Atbe apptied Onpassfnethe sgHat
in operational rules. This poses
significant cost
dsplayng the Cattionaspectthe traiA shotld
hurdle before such benefits can be gained.
stopatoreforetheassoclatedstop sgHaLTHHS
theAINStraekside fnstatlations ptacedarotnd
Warning systems
4 seconds-befere the-signal Whiet is-Hormally
Warning systems are usually designed and
fnterpretedasabott I8Om
positioned to alert the driver to the presence of
signal or sign at the trackside. The Automatic
AKeytechnieat Challenge for ANSarose WtHfts
Warning System (AWS) in the UK and used
apeatoftothrAfa eleetrfedfAfrastrHetHre:
12
update
sUch
Very
gain

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
The "Crocodile" system conveys two messages to the train by different voltages fed
to the ramp. The right hand photo shows Eurobalises, TBL antenna and Crocodile
togetherin a Belgian application.
Photos Wikimedia CC-BY-SA Charlotte Noblet (left) and Francois Melchior:
Electromagnet
Permanent magnet
AWS receiver
pre Hall effect
Dragging equipment
TPWS receiver
ramp
AWS
Left trackside magnets, right, train-carried equipment.
Photos David Fenner。
1) Signal green. Train responds to both magnets_
sounds bell to driver; no action_
2) Signal NOT green. Train responds to one magnet;
sounds horn to driver。 If driver does not respond
to horn brake applied after 2-3 seconds. If driver
responds no action by system。
Control Centre
Controls points and signals_
Watches train position from
train detection sections
AII signals fitted with AWS
Electric magnet
only energised when
Permanent
signal green
magnet
Train detection section
Train detection section 2
#
Approx 2OOm
Figure1
AWS application Trains with AWS or full TPWS can share the line
13

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
Hhere high Eurrent BCtraetion systersare Hsed
aceidents Causedby excess speed:The Aeedto
theretsatisk oferosstrack Cabtes Creating 'stray'
continleto feduee the harm Caused byaceidents
magnet fetds AAthis Casethe ANS detectors of
togetherwfththese HUmaAfactor weaknesses
AhetratAS were desensitisedandextra strength
stbseqtentbyfestttednthe detetoprent ofthe
magnets prowidedforthe trackside ANSfURCtiOns
Train Protectfeh Aarfing Syster fTPINSA
toHHiHtsethe fiskoffalse AINSAfarmatioffroH
Afeature OfANSanGfaHH stHiaf syysterns-ts
the stray fields:
they giyethe driyer one oftwefndicationsat
Another Challenge ts thenereasing Hse ofbf
eVerY SIgHaLTHUS,aAYfatlure ofthe traiRborne
drectionat SigHatng:Ath the magnetsfthe
eGHfpment ts Gtlekly fevealedtothe drerand
eentre efthetraek tratns A ether dtreetioH AAlt
carbemanagedthroughapproprate procedures:
"Another
detectthe fetdsTHHStralns passfng ONeraA
Inthe case efAHNS the Hse efa perfaAeIt
challenge is the
fnstatlationintendedforthe opposfte dtfectionef
magnet ensuresthat a complete faiture efthe
movernent WLexperienee a Aathing sfneethe
trackside fnstallationts +erffernote aAA SHAarf
increasing Use
BermaAent Hagnet WLbe the tast ftem passed
Ae drVer ANLAote arOnGndication:I shoutebe
Of bi-directional
OHtracks Ahere thisfsarnfregtent OcCHHreHCe
understood; ANSts Hot afafl Safe syster Ath a
Signalling"
a SgAHay befnstalledto femtnd the dryerthis
High SILfating: Itts therefore Importantthat fatlts
Narning doesnotaRRtother IAtocatiens
arefeportedprOmRtIanG-suitabte Heasures
Nhere sHCHAOVemeAt As Hore freGHeHt OrOUtd
takento operate Safely after dfseoyefff
festlt fHthe Heedto fegtlarfackhomedge
fretevant ANS AarHiRgs, the permanent Hagnet
Baseproteetfonsystefs
ts surrotndedbYaA electromagnet COILHIeH
The earliest protection SystemS Were trafH stops
suppressesthe permaAeHt AagAetie feld WheA
paced onthe traekatthe tocation ofa stop
afeterse direction moverent fs sfghalled THHs;
sfgHat; as pretotsty deserbedHhenthe sfghat
eutpHts arefequired frorthe fnterlocking
isshowfngastopaspectanarHs faised typieatly
sffster Hot just tofndeate Hherthe sfgHatfs
50 GOmIabove railheightThis-engages wtha
showngagreenaspect butalso whenateverse
tI CocKOAthe traH HeH Opensatent enthe
directionfoute ts set Occasfonallythe sghalting
brake pipe foreing-a-brake-application-ThetrafA
arrangement Hay enabte One ANSHStatation
WLbe passfng the signatat danger before the
tobe Hsedfortwo sgHals feading A Opposfte
brakesare
aPPteCAAAHeHEOntext this AsaSPAD
dtrectionsIA this Case the peraAeHt Hagnet
Htigationeastre ratherthaA preventionANeA
ALhave two electromagnets one efther end
te sfgnats Ctearthe trparHs towered belot
assoeated MtH the feletaft sGHat
Haitteyel:-TrafH stops +ere Horratlf pfotded
OH etros operatingntunnels because efthe
Aultipte aspeet SgHaHAg Has festltedH Aost
sighifieantHiskefa colisionfn stehtecations:
signats being eGuipped ANth ANSHeaning the
Etensfonto ethertecations Has fotlowed: To gaA
Aeedfor drver acknowedgement CaH become
fullprotection requires-atong enough OerrHA
"Train stops are
a Semf attomatic feaction; especially Nhen
tobrngthetralntoahalt from the HaXIHAHH
still a mitigation
Operatingacongested fatNaY OHfestrietiye
attathable-speecpriortothe brake-apRicatioA
aspects Andeedthis causedthe Southerf
measure rather
Fer Hetres this ts HSHalIyahassocfated desfgh
Regionef Brtish Rattto experment WthaHore
constrainttimiting Capacfty and-Creating SOHe
than a control
sophisticatedforr ef Signal Repeating ANS
Operating COnstratnts SHCHas festrieting speed
system"
fSRANSH durng the early 1970'5 butfnthe end
thfotgh Closed stations +henthe oyerlapatthe
tIs Was Hotadopted The Hroblem efnstinetiye
AeXt sfghats basedonthe HaxIHHHattaihable
fesponsets exacerbated bythe apptieatfoHefthe
speedfrora standing Start For HatAine HafWaYS
systerto severe peraAeHtaHCaLterporary
theconceptisoften notpractieabte dueto higher
speedfestrietions These feuirements afoseafter
speedsand extended braking distanees:
"Classic" trainstops on the Berlin S-Bahn, photo takenin 2007.
Photo Kabi/Wikimedia。
14

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
1) AWS as before_
2) If train speed less than overspeed sensor value
When signal red no action, 讦 overspeed brakes
applied for minimum one minute
3) If train (front end ) passes train stop When signal
red brakes applied for one minute_
Control Centre
Controls points and signals_
TPWS equipment active
Watches train position from
only when signal red
TPIIS only fitted to signals protecting
train detection sections
junctions and other "high risk" signals
TPWS train stop
AWS
TPWS overspeed
Sensor
Train detection section
Train detection section 2
节述
鲢d
Typically up to 35Om
Figure 2
Typical TPWS installation
TaA stops Have movedOH SGHIeaHtfroH thts
TPINSts Consideredto Hawe aHigh probabflity
eehHotogy buttheyafe StLa Agatfon AeasHre
efstoppingapassengertratn WthiHthe Overlap
HathertharacOAtrOLSysteA AAeaHYadaACe
prodedtheapproaeh speeds not greaterthaA
OHmechanieat contacttratn stop Systems Was
HSHRH fI2OKHHHanCadhesion CaA deliyer the
"Indusi" frstinstalledA GermaAaAGSHHOHHdIHG
braking effortefthe train Aere approach speeds
cotntries inthe 19305andfettyedhthe I950s
afe 
greater than TSmphanetiskfsassesseto be
Severatenhancements Hate stbsequently
high additional oyerspeedtoops-may be provded
eECurred teadingtothe SyStemKAOWHasPZB9Q:
eaflier onapproachtothe sgHalfFIGHre B
fhree tonesare generatedonthe drwng vehiete
overleaf}The system substantially mitigates the
anonteraet HtH passfte tuned cofls Hotnted
Hsktftha SPADbHt does Hot elimthate 戌
as feqttred traekside: The tuned Cofls Catse
The speedtrap fUHEtioA of TPHNS is determned
thefelevant freqtencf onthe Hotiye HHftto
jontly by thetraIAaAAthe fAfrastruetureTHe
fesonate +estltingfhaHfmpedanee Changeand
tratHhasapreset oHoardtImefAtthetrackside
thusactiatingthe fequiredaction The 2000H2
thearIAgandtriggerteopsare Separated b
tonetsatrath stop foretngabrake appIeatiof
apredetermined distanee- Corresponding-to
aACSAItypicatly fesonate OA passfngafed
a defned speed basedoHthe standafd tmer
Signat-The IOOOHztone tstypieallyassociated
setting:-Currentfmptementationsasstme two
Ntha-caHtionsignatandfequtfes a-drter
standard timer settings, One fer passenger trafns
acKHoMedgement followed by a speedfeduetioh
andatonger settino forfreight tratAsTHHS,the
AthIR a settime Whtlst a 5O0H2 tone fequires a
speedtrap NLacttate Afatrafh passesaboye a
IawerHAXIHHH Speedandts eften paced shortlfy
predefnedspeed based onts 'type'THis giyes
before afed Sgnat
HsetonotinffedHent Cases Ahere aafgIHat
Andusftuned Cofls are fnstalled ofthe steeper
eerspeec festltsfnaheatf brakeapplicatianthat
ends sotheyare Haturally OAlf deteetedbya
HaS
probably 'unnecessaryyin terms-ofthe trafh
veHieletraellAgA One dtrectionanddo AotAeed
beinableto stop where fegtired THIs CaA CaHse
suppressfonfor opposfte directionmovements:
drtersto dfstike the syster WheHs aCOACeIHaS
TPINSHthe HKHas felated funetienality Hthat
# Hayteadtto HisHSe:
tones,Inthis Case sfX ofthemafotnd SSHz,afe
TPWS is only
TPWSisarintermittent train protection-SysteT
transmttedfytrack HotHtedtoops thistme
provided at
centrally Hountedfnthe track THree fredHenetes
becase fIs OAl prowdedattocations thatafe
deemed-High HiskTHoseare defnedas-SigHals
locations that
AF
aringandOnetriggerare Hsedforthe
protectinga corvergentfunetionand setected
are deemed
HorHat dtrectiofofmotement andthe other
ether sIgHats Ahere the SPADHsktsassessedas
three fortratnstHthe Opposite directionorbt
high-risk"
dtreetionattrack These brotde the fUHetOAs
HigHL buffer stopsand severe speedfeduetions
Nheretheapproach speedtisorexceeds GOmRH
efa 'speectrap'fer atrafh trayelling fasterthan
fapproximately IOQKmA
deemed safeandatrafh stop fFigHre 2A Shotld
eftherthe speedtrap ortratH stop funetionbe
The TPANS systerfsactiyeto stopatrath so
actiatedafuttbfakeapptieatiorsfntiatedand
akeyfequirement is confirming the traekside
Hafntafned forOne AIAHtebHngine thetrathto
equipment ts fuAEtioning When fequtred:THIs
astandThetocatiofateHthetratf stopsts
t5 done bymonitorng the Ctrfent fedtothe
afunetien efthetraih brake perfermaHCeand
tansmitting toops Shoutd this falteutsidethe
thefnftfat speed pffortothe brakeappticatioH
fntended parameters aHfndieations giventothe
TheretsHo Certatnty tHIs Lbetna safe tecatieH:
SHReHSIHG SgHatlerandthe sgnatH fear Hetd
15

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
TPWS equipment
TPWS only fitted to signals protecting
active only when
junctions and other "high risk" signals
signal red
TPWStrain stop
AWS
TPWS overspeed
TPWSt overspeed
AWS
SensOr
sensor (when used)
Trigger loop
Arming loop
Trigger Ioop
Arming loop
Electromagnet
Permanent
(only active when
magnet
signal green)
#
d削
Typically up to 35Om
TPWS+ typically 75Om
Figure 3
Typical TPWS installation including AWS.
a Ganger Sfmilarl the OA- board equipmentts
The infrastructure profile must reflect the
self diagnostie to COnfr it fs functionatatthe
permitted speed, including any temporary speed
statt efafoHrHeyaAAASOHe Casesfntermttentlff
limits, covering at least the distance within the
thereafter As Ath ANS this Syster Aas Aet
current movement authority. This includes speed
GesignedAaECOfGaACeWth SIL4fequirerents;
limits over junctions which may vary depending
Sa safety Aeedsto be Certrelled b suftabte
on the route allocated _
It also needs to include
proceduresfHthe etentofafatlt:
the gradient profile over the same distance as
changes to gradient can have a significant effect
Neither PZBSOAGr TPINS CaHHretentaltacefdents
on stopping distance_
35
arefntermittent Systems. Both Systems
are prowded wfth faeflities to allowthe drfyerto
The location ofthe EoA either needs to be known
fesetthe systerafterabrake fntertentiofand
orat least it is beyond the range that currently
eontinde Wfth thejourney Sueh reset is required
needs to be considered (e.9-
When driving on
tobe Conduetedtnder controttederCHHStaAEes
green signals or the equivalent). To calculate the
IHVOIAg COmIHHICatIOA th the sfgnaller ef
ongoing speed profile, it is obviously necessary to
a ControtlerIH both Cases there ts eMdeHnee @f
know the current speed and
far the train has
driyers sometimestesetting AthOHt fattatfng
travelled to enable the remaining distance to any
teCorfect pfeeedufe; Aththe potentiatfora
speed change to be determined.
serfous acefdeyt
The braking performance of the train is a
FullATP systems with
parameter in performing the safe speed
intermittent update
envelope calculation。
"FullATP systems
FullATP systems continuously monitor the
The data about the infrastructure including route
continuously
movement of the train and intervene with a brake
set and signal status is usually fed to the train
monitorthe
application should the speed go outside the safe
intermittently as data telegrams by balises Or
envelope. An indication of a suitable speed is given
beacons, most of which will be associated with
movement ofthe
to the driver, this speed usually having a small
signal (Figure 4). Some systems use inductive
train"
margin beneath the safe speed envelope. These
loops laid in the track to pass the relevant
systems are normally designed in accordance with
telegrams. Infill may be provided where the
SIL 4requirements.
intermittent transmission of data has a significant
impact on operational capability:
To enable the train to continuously calculate
and monitor the safe speed profile information is
The need to know speed and distance travelled
needed about several parameters:
results in some
complex configurations of
equipment on board the train. The wheelto rail
Infrastructure profle
interface is notoriously challenging with relatively
Distance to the end of the movement authority
low adhesion. This makes simple odometry
(i.e_
signal) (EoA).
inadequate for the purposes of ATP especially as
Current speed of the train。
the objective is
system with high safety integrity.
Distance travelled
Slip (during acceleration) and slide (during braking)
are
relatively likely, both creating erroneous
Braking performance of the train。
information if reliance is placed on wheel rotation.
Maximum train speed。
Some systems use an unpowered and under
braked (or unbraked) axle as the sensor input.
16
they
how
key
fairly
stoP

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
1) Beacon tells train 'colour of signal' , permitted speeds
distance to next beacon, gradient etc.
2) Train computer calculates maximum safe speed
advises driver by display in cab。
3) Driver obeys lineside signals and signs。
4) If driver exceeds safe speed brakes applied。
Control Centre
Controls points and signals_
Abeacon is connected to every
Watches train position from
Infill loop updates trains
signal colourand informs train
train detection sections
approaching signals where
Of signal state
time may be lost f signal
changes aspect
Train detection section
Train detection section 2
Train detection section 3
渊U1
麒
#鞫
AWS
AWS
AWS
Signal
TBL beacon
Signal 2
TBL beacon
Signal 3
TBL beacon
Figure 4
ATP with
Another risk with wheel rotation is the slow but
issue
Itis afar more complex challenge for
intermittent update (as
steady change in size as the Wheel wears. Doppler
Variable formation locomotive hauled trains
used by Network Rail
radar is sometimes used, but is not without
especially freight trains_
The usual arrangement
between Londonand
challenges especially in damp or snowy conditions
is to request the driver to enter or select brake
Bristol)。
and of course like wheel rotation it is subject to a
data as part of train preparation. One challenge
steady build-up of position error unless corrected。
in defining the brake performance is Whether the
Use of a Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS)
system needs one or both the service brake and
offers another means
However, it rarely covers all
emergency brake parameters, and ensuring the
conditions, examples being tunnels and urban or
rolling stock and signal engineer are discussing
other 'canyons
where lost or reflected signals can
the same function! The rolling stock engineer will
affect the calculated position. Thus, odometry for
often regard the emergency brake as the brake
ATP is often
a mix of
systems to counteract the
Oflast resort (i.e.
a Vented air pipe) which may
weakness ofany one ofthem and to support the
resultin a lower deceleration rate because electric
determination of the margin of erroron the actual
braking and wheel slide prevention systems may
estimated position Which will tend to increase over
be disabled. If the emergency brake rate is lower
time and distance travelled. Balises or beacons
than the service brake rate it will tend to dominate
on the infrastructure are frequently used as a
the operating profile because it Will require the
"Odometry for
reference point to correct accumulated error。
Not
train to be slowed earlier than the service brake.
ATPis often a
surprisingly odometry problems are potentially
it is important to be clear between parties
mix of systems to
the biggest cause of train equipment failure for
exactly What the parameters mean and how
some ATP systems_
willbe used。
counteract the
weakness of
A further result of the challenge with odometry
The inputs from the above data sources are
is the need fora
'release" speed with many ATP
typically fed to a multi-channel processing
one ofthem
systems
Because the train cannot know exactly
system prior to being presented to the driver as a
where it is the ATP system will assume Worst
permitted speed indication and when necessary to
case error and therefore bring the train to
a halt
the brake activation interface:
a short distance prior to the current EoA
This is
significant problem if the next update function
FullATP systems with continuous
is located close to the EoAand in the case of the
update
EoA being at the end of a station platform When,
These systems have the same basic functionality
for station purposes, it is important to get close to
and challenges as described for intermittent
the platform
To counteract these challenges,
update systems, but the data about infrastructure
it is normal for the ATP system to return full
condition is able to be updated at any time. Such
control to the driver on final approach to the EoA
systems allow in cab signalling as the driver can be
provided the train is then operated below a low
informed ofan update to signalling conditions Via
'release" speed. This of course means there needs
the cab display.
to be
a short safe overrun beyond the EoA should
the train pass beyond the EoA
when
"trip
state
Early systems achieved continuous update by
will be entered to
bring the train to a stand。
transmitting codes to the train Via track Circuits_
In practice the number of codes capable of
Braking capability is the final parameter the system
transmission this way is severely restricted. So
needs. This is generally relatively simple for fixed
usually the train was given
maximum running
formation multiple unit trains, although a given
speed and a target speed to achieve at the end of
axle may under-perform due to
maintenance
the section. Information such as speed restrictions
17
ThUS,
they
any
end.

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
IUIO
NHO
HC JBR BPPRORCNE
 too
Ral

O
Opposite ends of
OI
gradient would have to be used as part of the
The major advantage of mobile data packet
the coded track train
design process when configuring the system for
systems is the much larger and reliable data
protection speed
the railway. This method of providing continuous
bandwidth, meaning more of the processing can
spectrum:
update is limited to lines using rolling stock with
be performed on the train and be relevant to the
Left the LGV-Est line in
France; equipped with
Very similar brake performance, orat least has to
specific train, resulting in better optimisation。
TVM430
be based on the Worst brake performance train
They also both open the way for the train to
Right, London
permitted. It was the backbone of the original
inform the infrastructure of its position and its
Underground's Central
London Underground Victoria Line automatic train
operating performance。
Line_
operation system from 1965 until recently and is
Photos Shutterstock/olrat
the basis of the signalling on many of the French
CBTC
Shutterstock/Ttatty.
LGV lines signalled using TVM 430.A significant
Many current resignalling projects for metro
challenge With such systems is the need to ensure
railways are based on Communications Based
the train can detect the track Circuit code prior
Train Control (CBTC). As the title suggests this is
to shorting the track circuit current as part of the
highly integrated form oftrain control covering
train detection role. Thus, assuming the detector is
all the important functions of train movement
at the front of the train, it is necessary for alltrack
including route setting, train location, movement
Circuit feeds to be ahead the train which means
authority often based on moving block, train
that reversal of feed and detector functions is
supervision and train driving. In the latest systems
necessary for any lengths of track used reversibly:
CBTC is often used on
railway working under
Automatic Train Operation (ATO) or
higher grade
Another early method of providing continuous
ofautomation with the objective of providing the
update Was via a loop usually between the rails
maximum achievable capacity on the routes fitted。
Which radiates data to the train. The German LZB
system is perhaps the best known of this form and
CBTC systems incorporate continuous ATP
is also the parent system for several others of this
protection using radio communications between
"CBTC systems
type (e.9. SELTrac). In this particular case the data
the train and the trackside installation
The actual
incorporate
rate is low by modern standards (1200 baud up
form of the radio link which is also used for other
link to the train; 600 baud down link). Thus, the
aspects of the CBTC system, varies between
continuous
data Volumes handled between trackand train
both supplier and application and may include
ATP protection
are relatively low (circa 85 bits per telegram). As
Wi-Fi and 4G/LTE, although the majority ofnew
using radio
a result much of the calculation is performed in
systems are likely to use 4G/LTE. The detailed
communications"
the LZB control centre and limited target speed
methods of implementation are proprietary to
data is passed to the train. The loops in the four
the manufacturer。
foot are crossed every IOOm which both reduces
Most systems of this type have been implemented
interference and provides
distance monitoring
on individual lines ofa metro or on people mover
function to the train by reversing the phase of the
systems (e.9.at airports). This has the advantage
radiated signal.
ofa limited range of
rolling stock making the train
The system is in relatively widespread use through
parameters consistent and thus maximising the
Germany and Spain, especially on high speed lines;
capacity
from moving block。
with other applications in Austria and elsewhere
Two disadvantages are the need, especially on
The most recent systems in this category are
high capacity metro, of having a highly reliable
urban CBTC train control systems and ETCS
system requiring layers of redundancy, and the
Level 2 and above; both of which use radio
proprietary nature of the systems from each
systems to transmit data between track and train。
manufacturer which for commercial reasons
restricts the use of such systems on
large
network of lines。
18
%92
gain

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
ETCS
Level 3, Which is not yet fully developed, will
enable train detection to be based on data
Until the around the 1990s most EU countries
had their own train protection systems as wellas
received by the RBC from the trains in the area.It
Will therefore facilitate the reduction or removal
signalling and communications arrangements
This resulted in relatively closed markets for
Of lineside train detection equipment and facilitate
signalling products and required different
the introduction of short virtual blocks or perhaps
systems to be available on any driving vehicle
moving block。
significant challenge at present
that might cross from one country to another。
is from variable formation trains (e.9. freight and
The advent of through international trains such
locomotive hauled passenger trains) and proving
as Eurostar required the trains to be fitted with
theyare complete at all times_
multiple train protection and communication
Other ETCS levels also exist, including those
systems and for the drivers to be trained in the
working With
a national ATP system througha
differing signalling arrangements. The opening
Specific Transmission Module (Level STM),and
up of markets prompted the EU to propose
Level 0 when an equipped train is operating over
"The advent
common standard for rail traffic management
unfitted infrastructure and is thus subject only to
Of
and especially signalling, train protection and
train ceiling speed supervision.
through
radio communications across the EU states Which
international
culminated in the definition and development of
In addition to these primary levels there also exist
trains suchas
ERTMS including ETCS and GSM-R for track to
options for Limited Supervision which effectively
provides train protection only at critical locations
train communication
Eurostar required
and thus corresponds to intermittent train
the trains to
ETCS provides three primary levels of
protection. Finally, there are proposals for ETCS
implementation together with others to suit
Hybrid Level 3 which provides virtual blocks as
be fitted with
specific needs。
Wellas conventional train detection, delivering
multiple train
capacity benefits for trains that are Level 3
Level 1 is essentially an intermittent update ATP
protection and
system associated with existing lineside signals
enabled, without having to bar the route to Level 2
communication
with the same facilities and restrictions in terms of
Or unfitted trains
An article about ETCS Level 3
'infill'. The primary track to train communication
and Hybrid Level 3 was published in the April 2017
systems"
issue of IRSE News
media is the balise with infill loops an option
Level 2 adds a Radio Block Centre (RBC)and
Positive Train Control (PTC)
provides continuous update of movement
In North America there is currently
programme
authority and all associated infrastructure data by
to implement Positive Train Control (PTC)on
radio. For ETCS the currently specified radio link
all intercity passenger lines, and on freight lines
is Via
continuously open GSM-Rcall. However,
carrying more than 5 million tons perannum
this is likely to change as train radio moves to
ofinhalable toxic substances. PTC is
a form of
packet switched (4G/LTE or 5G). In the interim
ATP in that it requires the prevention of collision
GSM-Rmay be supplemented with General
due to passing the end of authority or passing
China's CTCS system
Packet Radio Service (GPRS),a 2/36 packet
through misaligned points and speed supervision
shares many concepts
oriented mobile data standard, to support ATP
to prevent derailment at speed restrictions
With ETCS but has
in
areas
It therefore has the functions ofa
whether permanent or temporary. There is no one
developed very quickly
continuous update ATP system
Lineside signals
mandated solution but there is the requirement of
in order to keep up
can be removed but Level 2 retains trackside
interoperability between systems as many vehicles
with infrastructure
developments across the
train detection and
interlocking functions. Sucha
travelover several networks. It also requires
country。
system can provide the basis for Automatic Train
provision of arrangements to protect track
Photo Shutterstock/
Operation (ATO) and has been implemented on
workers. Whilst several systems were proposed
kikujungboy。
the Thameslink core through central London
most installations have settled on one of three
systems and all Will operate with each other.
栈点苎}
s[訾
19
busy

IRSE News
Issue 268
JulylAugust 2020
8707
8707
恩
8
0
In a similar way that CTCS
The PTC system was mandated by law signed in
Conclusion
was created to meet the
2008. The original law required the system(s) to
needs of China, PTC Was
In this article
have attempted to summarise the
be in place by 2015 but costs and challenges in
scope oftrain
warning and protection systems
developed to meet the
specific needs of North
implementation mean this date has been pushed
and to highlight some of the majorissues the
Americas railroads.Union
back to the end of 2020. The range of operating
implementation of ATP faces as wellas giving an
Pacific has been one
conditions from metro and commuter railways
insight into some of the systems that exist。
ofthe adopters of this
to long heavy haul freight lines means variety of
technology.
solutions is too great to discuss here and could
Photo Shutterstock/
well be the subject of a separate article。
AngelDiBilio_
About the author
"Back to Basics" and the IRSE Exam
David joined the S &Tdepartment of the
We hope our 'Back to Basics' series is
Southern Region of British Railin 1968as a
interesting to all members, bringing topics
student engineer, with his first appointment
that underpin our profession into focus ina
in the telecommunication design office. He
simply understood, yet comprehensive Way,
supported the testing and commissioning of
making continuing professional development
passenger information systems, including the
straightforward。
automatic operation of platform indicators at
We particularly hope the articles are interesting
London Bridge and Waterloo East and setting
to those of you Who are new to the industry
a career profile linked with development
andare
working to build up your knowledge
Of new systems。
For those considering taking the IRSE exam,
In the 198Os David led a team involved with
these articles should be particularly relevant
train describer development and
a new
system
foryour studies。
to distribute train location information Via
As an example; why not think about how yoU
the national teleprinter network, followed by
would answer this question from the 2019
the development of the Integrated Electronic
Module 5 of the exam, based on what you'Ve
Control Centre (IECC) including automatic
learnt from the article?
route setting. He was also involved in improving
electromagnetic compatibility between train
"Describe a system which provides train
detection and new rolling stock。
protection for a stop signal or limit of
movement authority. Using a diagram, clearly
Moving to Railtrack in 1994 he was involved
describe each of the following:
with the development and implementation
of TPWS and the development of ERTMS in
How the speed ofa train approaching
Europe; his work
including the implementation
signalora limit of movement authority is
strategy for the UK. Before retirement David
monitored and controlled;
managed the safety assurance process for the
(ji)
How a train is prevented from ignoring a
Cambrian ERTMS pilot. David is one of the
signal displaying a stop aspect ora limit of
contributing editors of IRSE News。
movement authority; and
(ii) The necessary interfaces to the signalling
system including the interlocking and
control system。
20
E

stop