11
Ian MitchellBack to basics: Operator interfaces
This article in the ‘Back to basics’ series 
covers the subject of the interface between 
the signalling system and a human operator in a signalbox or control centre. The technology of these systems varies from mechanical levers and control panels with switches or buttons to computer workstations, but they all provide controls, which enable the operator to manage train movements and indications, which provide the operator with information about the status of the signalling equipment and position of trains.
As with other ‘back to basics’ articles, the intention 
is to provide an overview for IRSE members new to the industry who do not have experience of working in this specific area. The aim is to describe 
the systems in a generic manner, but using 
examples based mainly on UK main line railway practice. The scope is limited to the core signalling functions and excludes voice communications, which is of course also a key element of any 
operator interface.
Evolution of the interface
In the mechanical signalling era, the operator 
interface and the interlocking were combined, 
the controls were levers above the ﬂoor of 
the signalbox that directly interacted with the mechanical interlocking in the locking room below, and via rods and wires to the points and 
signals on the railway outside. 
Example of a mechanical 
lever frame. Note the 
indicators on the front of the shelf over the levers, showing the status of points and signals.
 IRSE News |  Issue 269  |  September 2020
12
In the early days there were no indications 
provided – the position of the levers provided feedback of the state of the points and signals and 
big windows gave good visibility of passing trains. 
A signalbox diagram showing the track layout and location of signals was provided, but this simply provided static information such as lever numbers 
for each point and signal.
The first indications were electro-magnetic 
devices where the position of a needle repeated the position of the semaphore arm of a signal that 
was out of sight from the signalbox. These devices 
are typically mounted on the ‘block shelf’ above the levers for the signals to which they apply. In later years the electro-magnetic indicators were 
superseded by modules with coloured lamps. 
These came to be applied more widely when lever frames were used to electrically control colour light signals and power operated points and the direct connection between lever position and the 
outside equipment was lost.
When track circuits were introduced on an 
intermittent basis, similar indicators were provided 
on the block shelf to show the track sections 
occupied by trains, but when track circuiting became more widespread, a better visualisation of train location came to be provided by lamps on the signalbox diagram.
The final elements of the operator interface 
in a mechanical signalbox are the block instruments that communicate with neighbouring 
signalboxes. In the early days they were purely a 
communication system, by which the operators offered and accepted trains over the block section between the signalboxes, and the indications provided the operator with a reminder of whether 
the section was clear or occupied by a train. 
In later years they became true controls as an electrical interlocking prevented the starting signal lever being operated until the block instrument 
indicated ‘line clear’.
An inherent feature of a mechanical interface is 
that when routing a train through the control area, the operator has to first individually move and 
lock all the points along the route, then operate the signals to give the correct proceed aspects 
to the train, and finally replace each signal to its most restrictive aspect after the train has passed. 
In a complex area, this will require several lever 
operations for every train, with a significant amount of physical effort where the points and signals are mechanically operated.
Control panels 
Some early relay interlockings retained the traditional lever interface, with rows of miniature signalling levers on a desk, but the same result 
can be achieved equally well using standard 
industrial switches mounted on a control panel. These can be arranged in rows as in a lever frame, or on a schematic track diagram so that 
each switch is adjacent to the representation of 
the point or signal it controls. This is known as an individual function switch (IFS) panel, as each switch controls one point or signal, with the operator making the required sequence of switch 
operations to set the route for a train. 
A further evolution of the control interface 
came with the introduction of ‘route setting’ 
interlockings, as described in an earlier ‘back to 
basics’ article. The first examples of this were one control switch (OCS) panels on which an individual switch or button was provided to set and cancel 
each route within the interlocking. This was further 
refined into the entrance exit (NX) panel, where setting a route is achieved by operating switches or buttons at both entrance and exit of a route on the schematic track diagram. This provided a very 
intuitive and easy to operate interface and became 
the standard method of operation from the 1950s onwards. Points on these panels are provided with three-position switches – the centre position 
allowing the points to move as required for route 
setting, and the left and right positions locking the points in the normal or reverse positions.
The indications provided to the operator also 
evolved to provide information on the status of 
the route locking logic within the interlocking. This is typically a row of white lights on the schematic track diagram to show the path over each train 
detection section for which a route has been 
Examples of NX panels 
at Carlisle (left) and 
Tweedmouth (right). 
Photos Westinghouse 
Archive.
“Some early relay 
interlockings 
retained the 
traditional lever 
interface”
 IRSE News |  Issue 269  |  September 2020
13
locked. The progress of a train then appears as 
the white route lights changing to red in sequence along the route.
The NX controls and indications can either 
be combined on a single panel, or split with controls on a desk immediately in front of the 
operator and indications on a separate panel 
(often wall mounted) behind the desk – the latter arrangement is more common for large control centres with multiple operators.
Computer workstations
The operator interface in a modern control centre is now usually a computer workstation, with multiple screens to display a schematic 
track diagram of the railway under control. The 
indications of signalling equipment status, route setting and track occupation are provided by colour coding of the symbols on the schematic 
track diagram, following the conventions that 
were originally established for lights on panels. 
The operator interacts with the system via a 
computer keyboard and a mouse or trackerball, 
with a mode of operation mimicking an OCS 
or NX panel, e.g. click on route entrance symbol and select a route from a drop down list, or click on entrance symbol and then exit symbol in sequence.
One significant difference between computer 
workstations and the older technologies is in the method by which an operator applies a ‘reminder’ 
to prevent themselves from operating a control; 
for instance to prevent points being moved when maintenance is being undertaken. With levers or a panel, the reminder is simply a physical device 
that the operator attaches to the control that 
prevents it being operated – a collar on a lever, or a cap over a button or switch. On a computer workstation, the reminder is a software function that needs to be designed into the signalling 
system. A reminder is displayed on the workstation screen as highlighting of the symbol for the 
signalling object to which it applies, and the interlocking must reject any attempt to operate a 
control with a reminder applied (this check may 
be within the computer workstation interface where an older interlocking without this facility is recontrolled).
The number of screens is determined by the size 
and complexity of the area under control. It is usually a requirement that an overview of the whole of the controlled area must be visible at any 
time, and this is sometimes achieved on an upper 
row of screens displaying fixed areas, while the operator interacts with a lower row of screens on the desk where a selected area can be displayed in 
more detail, and to view the status of alarms and 
other information from the system.
The overview displays may be shared between 
multiple workstations – sometimes this is a very 
large wall mounted display covering the whole 
control centre area. This may be provided mainly for the benefit of managers or other staff in the room; an alternative to this is a ‘supervisors 
workstation’ where any of the signalling screens 
can be selected to be displayed on a ‘view only’ basis. Some control centres now cover very large areas, with tens of workstations controlling several hundred route kilometres of railway.
Computer workstations often provide additional 
functionality beyond the standard controls and indications, such as automatic route setting (ARS) 
or overrun management. Some of these are 
described later in the article.
Technology and safety
In the mechanical and early relay interlocking era, the technology for the operator interface was simply a direct mechanical or electrical interface 
between levers, switches, lamps and relays. The 
concept of the signalling control system as a separate entity from the interlocking appeared 
Example of a first 
generation computer 
workstation with screens 
and a trackerball. This 
is the workstation 
controlling Liverpool 
Street terminus in London at the first Integrated 
Electronic Control Centre 
(IECC) commissioned by 
British Rail in 1989 – still 
in service in 2020 but due to be upgraded in the 
near future.
“The operator interface in 
a modern 
control centre 
is now usually 
a computer 
workstation with 
multiple screens”
 IRSE News |  Issue 269  |  September 2020
14
when remote control systems were introduced 
to allow a large control centre to interface with multiple interlockings over telecommunications 
links. A remote control system comprises an 
‘office end’ that connects to the controls and indications on the panel at the control centre, and a ‘field end’ that connects to relay coils 
and contacts in the interlocking. The office 
and field ends communicate with one another via a telecommunications link, so that every operation of a control on the panel energises the corresponding relay in the interlocking, and a relay 
contact closure in the interlocking illuminates a 
lamp on the panel. The most common form of remote control is ‘time division multiplex’ (TDM) where the signalling states are coded into a digital 
message, which can be sent through a standard 
serial interface via a modem. TDM hardware typically comprises a rack of electronics, with a master processor card and a variable number of input and output cards to match the number of 
controls and indications required.
With some types of relay interlockings, there is a 
split between the ‘vital’ logic in the interlocking 
itself, and ‘non-vital’ logic at the operator 
interface. Examples of non-vital logic are translating push button sequences into a route request, or the logic to extinguish a white route lamp when the corresponding red track circuit 
lamp is lit. These are considered non vital because 
the impact of a failure of the remote control system that generates an incorrect control to the interlocking is the same as a human error in 
operating this control, and should be protected 
by the interlocking logic. Similarly, an incorrect indication can only result in a hazard if it misleads the operator to undertake an unsafe action. The non vital logic was implemented in smaller and 
cheaper ‘post office’ relays or in an electronic 
‘panel processor’. Modern microprocessor based TDMs can now incorporate this sort of logic in either the office or field end equipment.
With the move to electronic interlockings and 
computer workstations, the same considerations apply, but the safety analysis has become more sophisticated with the arrival of CENELEC 
standards and the concept of safety integrity 
levels (SIL). It is now recognised that an operator interface failure in combination with human error could lead to an accident in abnormal working situations and so some of the functions 
of an operator interface are categorised as SIL 
2 (interlockings are in the highest integrity level SIL 4, and non-safety functions are SIL 0).
Where an operator interface function needs to 
achieve a particularly high safety integrity level, one approach is to require a sequence of controls to be sent to the interlocking, which will only accept them if they are consistent and received 
within a limited time window. An example of this is 
an axle counter restoration control, which requires the operator to undertake two different actions (e.g. clicking on a symbol and entering a track 
section name), which generate separate messages 
from the interface to the interlocking. This process provides protection against human error by the operator and spurious messages generated as a result of a fault in the interface.
The hardware and software architecture for a 
computer workstation is generally based on commercial off the shelf (COTS) computing 
components, engineered into a system that will 
achieve the necessary SIL and availability targets. Except for the smallest installations, this will imply duplication of all the critical components and data links to avoid single points of failure. 
The architecture varies between suppliers, but 
in recent years there has been a trend towards a ‘client/server’ approach that decouples the 
Points keyed normal and reminder 
applied to points and signalARS sub areas 
switched on and offTrack section occupied by train – red 
circle is axle counter reset controlRoute set ahead of train to this 
signal, with overlap beyond it
Main signal with 
call-on aspectShunt 
signalAutomatic signal with 
replacement controlControlled signal wor king in 
automatic modeShort bar indicates 
normal lie of points
Screenshot showing 
typical symbols used to provide signalling 
indications on a  
computer workstation.
“With some 
types of relay 
interlockings 
there is a split 
between the ‘vital’ logic in 
the interlocking 
itself and ‘non 
vital’ logic at 
the operator 
interface”
 IRSE News |  Issue 269  |  September 2020
15
interfaces to the interlockings and the area-wide 
functions such as automatic route setting and train describer (see below) from the operator 
interfaces. This allows the areas controlled by the 
workstations to be dynamically reconfigured, for instance to reduce the number of workstations that need to be staffed in quiet periods. A further 
extension of this concept is to allow dynamic 
reconfiguration between control centres – for instance to provide a backup disaster recovery facility to maintain train operations when the primary control centre building has to be 
evacuated as a result of a terrorist attack or a 
natural disaster.
Train describer
The track occupation indications on a panel or workstation show where there are trains in the controlled area, but the operator (or ARS) 
also needs to know the identity of each train so 
that it can be routed correctly. Each train will be allocated a number or alphanumeric code (sometimes called a ‘headcode’) and these are 
displayed to the operator by a system known as 
a ‘train describer’. Train describers were one of the earliest applications of computer technology 
in signalling, and with a control panel the train 
describer is a dedicated processor interfaced 
to small alphanumeric displays set into the 
indications panel, or a separate computer screen. On a computer workstation the train describer is simply a software function within the system, with 
the train numbers displayed at the appropriate 
locations on the main screens. In either case a user interface to the train describer is required to allow an operator to enter (sometimes referred to as ‘interposing’), delete and amend train numbers 
or enter other codes such as line blocked.
As conventional lineside signalling does not 
provide a data path for a train to report its identity 
to the control centre, the train describer requires 
the train number to be entered manually by an operator or automatically from the timetable at the start of the train’s journey, and it then tracks the train through the controlled area by 
monitoring the sequence of route setting and 
track section occupation. The train describer logic is based on the concept that trains move between ‘berths’ – when a train is in the berth associated 
with a signal, it means this is the next signal it will 
encounter in its journey. Additional berths are provided at locations where trains may reverse, or where permissive working allows more than one train in a section. 
When a train passes from one control area to 
another, the train number is transmitted as a data message between the train describers for the two 
areas. Similar data messages reporting every train 
step are also sent from each train describer to a national train running information system, which provides the data source for real time customer and staff information displays, automated public 
address announcements, and recording systems 
for performance monitoring.Alarms and overrun management
Whatever the technology, the interface will provide a number of alerts and alarms. Some of these relate to equipment failures, and 
others to events that the operator needs to 
be aware of. A typical example will be a train describer alarm when a track section becomes unexpectedly occupied. 
A specific alarm for signal passed at danger (SPAD) 
was introduced in the UK as a result of the public inquiry recommendations following the Ladbroke Grove accident in 1999. When a track section 
occupation sequence occurs at a red signal which 
may be as a result of a SPAD, a distinctive (and loud) alarm sounds and the area of overrun at the signal is highlighted on the workstation screens.
On some recent installations with computer 
workstations this facility has been further enhanced with an automated response to the SPAD event to stop other trains in the area. The 
processor in the interface system sends requests 
to the interlocking to replace other signals on the approach to the SPAD area. This is known as a ‘predefined operational protection’ (POP) control. Providing this capability in the SIL 2 interface 
system can allow simplification of logic in the SIL 
4 interlocking.
Automatic Route Setting
Modern control centres with computer workstations often include an automatic route setting (ARS) facility. This reduces the operator 
workload linked to routine train movements, 
allowing them to focus on problem areas and tasks that require voice communications with staff and the public.
ARS is usually a separate processor within the 
operator interface system that monitors the movement of trains as reported by the train describer, and uses an electronic version of the 
timetable for the day to identify which routes 
should be set to allow each train to run through the controlled area on its planned path and timings. Where possible the objective is to set routes sufficiently far ahead of the train so the 
driver always sees green signals, although there 
are exceptions to this, e.g. where departure from a station needs to wait for a ‘train ready to start’ message from platform staff.
An important principle is that ARS should not 
‘challenge’ the interlocking by requesting a route that is not available to be set. This requires the ARS 
to be programmed with a copy of the interlocking 
route availability logic and to monitor the signalling states such as track occupancy, route locking and reminders.
When trains are running late, it is very likely that 
conﬂ icts will arise where two trains require to 
run over the same section of track at the same 
time. This can arise when routes converge or cross, and at crossing points on single lines (see 
the article by John Francis in the June 2020 
IRSE News for some examples). ARS requires an “The operator 
also needs to know the identity of each train”
“Modern control centres with computer workstations often include an automatic route setting facility”
 IRSE News |  Issue 269  |  September 2020
16
algorithm to decide which train to give priority in 
these circumstances – this might be to keep the trains in timetable order, ‘first come first served’ 
or a comparison of the predicted train delays for 
the alternative options. At the design stage for a new installation, workshops with operators who are experienced with the train service in the area 
are a valuable source of information to tailor the 
algorithms for each potential area of con ﬂ ict.
The operator retains the capability to set routes 
manually at any time, and where this is necessary the operator can switch off ARS for an individual 
train, or for an ‘ARS sub-area’, typically a single 
junction or running line between stations. ARS sub-areas will also be automatically switched off if an operator cancels a route that has been 
set by ARS, a SPAD is detected, or a signal group 
replacement control is operated.
Traffic management
Traditionally the timetable used by ARS was updated on a daily basis from the national train planning systems. Since ARS can only set routes 
for trains according to the timetable, additional 
trains and those required to deviate from the timetable have to be routed manually by the operator. This can be avoided if ARS can be 
provided with a dynamic timetable, updated 
throughout the day with changes to the plan. This is the concept behind ‘traffic management’ which aims to move away from operators making train routing decisions in real time, to a process where 
issues are identified well in advance, and solutions 
are identified and incorporated into the dynamic timetable so that all trains can be routed by ARS.
Traffic management systems are another layer of 
functionality that sit above the primary operator interfaces described in this article. The interface with the signalling is via timetable updates to ARS, so there is minimal safety impact (i.e. SIL 0). They 
may also be used by operators who have strategic 
responsibility for a whole route, a ‘controller’ or ‘despatcher’ rather than a ‘signaller’. The user interface is usually in the form of a train graph or 
a platform occupation chart, which shows the 
planned, actual and predicted movement of each train and highlights trains that are deviating from 
the plan and the consequential con ﬂ icts with 
other trains and with planned line blockages. Edit facilities allow trains to be rescheduled, rerouted or cancelled, and additional trains to be inserted 
into the timetable. There may also be a ‘what if’ 
facility to allow an operator to try out alternative options for rescheduling, evaluate the impact on train delays and other key performance indicators 
for the train service, and then deploy the chosen 
option into the dynamic timetable.
Train protection and ERTMS/ETCS
Train protection systems overlaid onto conventional lineside signalling using track mounted equipment to communicate with the 
train (e.g. TPWS in the UK) have little impact on 
the operator interface, other than perhaps an indication to warn of equipment failure.ETCS level 2 introduces a communication link 
between the train and a radio block centre (RBC), 
and this may require an operator interface, to provide information on the ETCS mode of operation of each train, and to allow updating of temporary speed restrictions. In early applications 
these functions have not been integrated into the 
primary operator interface system (which is only linked to the interlocking), and a separate stand alone terminal from the ETCS supplier provides an 
operator interface to the RBC. As ETCS becomes 
more widespread, more integrated solutions are likely to evolve.
Metros
On modern metros with CBTC signalling, the system architecture generally includes a component known as ‘automatic train supervision’ 
(ATS), and this incorporates the operator interface, 
including automatic route setting and traffic management functions. ATS interfaces with automatic train operation (ATO) so that decisions 
made in the control centre can directly in ﬂ uence 
movement of trains without involvement of a human driver. 
For most metros the key parameter being 
managed is not the adherence to the timetable, but the regularity of trains, and the operator interface allows this to be monitored and managed. If two trains are running close together, 
ATS can delay the departure of the second train 
from a station to even out the gaps in the service, or instruct the ATO to run at reduced speeds between stations to save energy. 
Integration of systems
This article has described the operator interface for the core signalling functions, but in a modern control centre the person at a control panel or 
computer workstation will also have to interact 
with a number of other systems. Examples of this can include voice communications with train drivers and track workers, closed circuit television 
(CCTV) monitoring of level crossings and stations, 
monitoring systems for vehicle or infrastructure faults, passenger and staff information systems, 
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) 
systems for electric traction power supply, and 
even corporate information technology (IT) 
applications such as emails and timesheets.
Traditionally there has been little integration of 
the operator interfaces for these systems – a 
typical computer workstation will have a separate terminal on the desk for voice communications, an office type personal computer for the corporate IT network, and dedicated screens 
for CCTV monitoring. The technology exists 
to integrate all of these into a single interface, but there are practical, commercial and safety assurance obstacles to integrating systems from 
different suppliers when there are no standard 
interface specifications, and differing system architectures, SIL requirements and system lifecycles. An integrated solution is most likely to be seen on a turnkey project to build a new metro 
or high speed line.“Traditionally 
the timetable 
used by ARS was 
updated on a 
daily basis from 
the national 
train planning 
systems”
“For most 
metros the key 
parameter being 
managed is not 
the adherence to 
the timetable but 
the regularity of 
trains”
Traffic management in action IRSE News |  Issue 269  |  September 2020
17
The figures above are examples of a traffic management 
user interface – these are from the Luminate system 
supplied by Resonate for Network Rail’s Western route. The train graph (above) represents each train as a line on 
the graph, the X axis is time and Y axis is distance along 
the route (Paddington to Reading). The violet vertical bar is the current time with actual train movements to the left and predicted movement to the right. The 
‘platform docker’ (below) shows platform occupancy 
at a passenger station (Slough). The X axis is again time, and each platform is represented by a horizontal row with rectangles representing each train and the time it occupies the platform. In this case the trains are colour coded to highlight whether they are running on time or 
late. The panel to the right on each screen gives statistics 
relevant to key performance indicators for the train service performance and identifies trains that may incur penalties for late running.
Screenshots from Resonate Group Limited.
 IRSE News |  Issue 269  |  September 2020
18
About the author ...
Ian Mitchell has 45 years’ experience in the rail industry, in 
British Rail Research and its post-privatisation successor companies – AEA Technology Rail, DeltaRail and Resonate. 
He retired as professional head of signalling in 2011, but still 
does some consultancy for his previous employers as well as acting as one of editors of IRSE News and as a member of the International Technical Committee. He presented a 
Presidential Paper on the topic “Signalling Control Centres 
Today and Tomorrow” in 2003, and is due to deliver another in 2021 jointly with Nora Balfe, who is a human factors specialist with Irish Rail.Human factors
It goes without saying that an effective operator interface to the signalling system must be designed with the operator in mind, and human factors specialists have played an increasingly 
important role in design of modern control centres. This starts 
with workload analysis to determine how large an area of railway can be effectively managed by an individual operator, as this will determine the number of workstations and hence 
the size of the control room. The constraining factor will 
be determined by the level of automation in the system; for instance where ARS is provided, the workload during busy periods of train operations may be less than at night when the operator has to manage line blockages for work on the track.
At a more detailed level, the size of text and symbols on 
the screens, the number of screens and their location on the desk, the height of the desk and even the type of chair all need consideration to ensure the operator remains alert 
and comfortable.
Conclusion
As with other areas of signalling technology, the evolution 
from levers to computer mouse has been dramatic, but the fundamental principles of controls and indications remain. 
What has changed the most is the level of automation; modern 
systems now require little human intervention when the railway is running to plan, but an experienced operator and a well designed human interface are still crucial in dealing with failures 
and unexpected scenarios. 
One of the lectures later in this year’s Presidential Programme 
will specifically explore the issue of automation in control centres – what are the strengths and weakness of existing 
systems, what further tasks could be automated, and how 
do we ensure the human and computer work together most effectively?
Vancouver’s Canada Line was equipped from opening with an 
integrated control centre, bringing a range of signalling, station and 
communication functions together at one workstation.
Photo Siemens Mobility.
“Back to basics” and the IRSE Exam
We hope that our “Back to basics” articles are particularly 
interesting to those of you who are new to the industry and are working to build up your knowledge. For those 
considering taking the IRSE exam, these articles should be 
particularly relevant for your studies.
As an example, why not think about how you would answer 
this question from the 2015 Module 5 of the exam, based on 
what you’ve learnt from the article?
Describe, with the aid of a drawing, the layout of either a 
mimic panel or a signaller’s VDU display control system. 
You should include details of how each of the following 
are dealt with:
i) Route Setting and cancellation [4 marks].
ii) Manual movement of points [3 marks].
iii) Train detection status during normal and failure 
conditions [4 marks].
iv) Protection of different types of engineering 
work [3 marks].
v) How a major failure of the display would be 
managed [4 marks].
vi) Signals Passed at Danger [2 marks].vii) Train identification [3 marks].
viii) Adjacent signal box alarms [2 marks].