1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Metro Railways
Automation and a summary Of differences from typical main line railways
Version 5
(This document is intended for candidates taking Module A of the IRSE Professional Examination。
Some content comes from the IRSE Metro Train Control
Systems textbook)
Rail based public transport covers a wide spectrum ranging from tramways With little or no signalling to high speed lines with cab signalling and full
automatic train protection. Within that range, this comparison seeks to summarise the main differences between a typical metro and a typical main line
railway.
The main line railway is assumed to be a mixed traffic network of lines (express passenger, suburban or local passenger & freight).
The metro is
taken to be a
transit" railway with high passenger flows and some underground sections such as exist in many large cities globally。
It can also be
known as the underground, subway, or tube。
The document also outlines the various degrees of automation applied to metros worldwide
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx
"mass

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Summary Of differences
Metro railway
Main line railway
Traffic patterns
High frequency service, particularly in city centres. Frequency of more
Wide range of frequencies though not as high as the most frequent
than 30 trains per hour can be achieved.
metros
Lh epacityepableoftrznsportilg etS@@@@passengers perhel
Hghcepacity cen be delivered,usually With longer less fregyent trains:
Trains nearly always stop at all stations
Variable stopping patterns to accommodate express and stopping trains。
This has anadverse effect on capacity.
Does not share tracks with freight or inter-city type services, but some
The same tracks are used by express passenger, suburban passenger &
Systems Share some Sectionsgfroutewithsyburbantrains:
freighttrains:
Station stops are often close together
Station stops can be very Widely separated=
Passenger management
Carry large numbers of people over relatively short distances in city
Typically longer journeys with lower passenger densities at stations。
centres and the surrounding areas. Managing passenger flows within
Passenger management is only critical in locations with high passenger
stations is an important consideration.
densities。
Headway & Capacity_
Station dwell times are minimised because at high frequencies on an
Station dwell times are less criticalon most routes。
existing system, this is the most significant limiting factor on capacity。
More and wider train doors tend to reduce dwell time:
When designing a new metro line, higher capacity trains (e.8
more cars,
The same principles apply, but are only significant where there are high
fewer seats) will increase passenger capacity.
High acceleration and
passenger densities。
braking rates are more important ways of increasing capacity than high
maximum speeds。
Terminal station layouts and procedures are designed to deliver rapid train
Relatively long layovers at terminal stations are usual。
turnrounds to maximise the train frequency for the number of platforms.
The number of platforms can be a major constraint on line capacity.
Fixed block is widespread, but With short track circuit sections carefully
Fixed block is the norm
Moving block is enabled by the highest levelof
designed to optimise capacity.
Moving block is used by modern CBTC
ETCS (not yet widely implemented), but this is less valuable in increasing
systems to increase capacity and shorten signalling headway by reducing
capacity where different types of train share the same tracks.
theallowed train separationas the following train slows down:
Mod.A Metro differences V5 .docx
Very

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Metro railway
Main line railway
Safety
More
frequent service increases collision risk。
Collisions in tunnels have
Higher speeds increase the potential consequences of a collision or
the potential for very serious consequences。
Automatic Train Protection
derailment (though there are far fewer tunnels).
A wide variety of ATP
(ATP) to prevent collisions is considered essential on most lines。
systems exist and are commonly used. ATP is typically integrated within
ATPis typicallyintegrated_within modern Systems suchas CBTC_
modern Systems suchas ETCS.
Fire or smoke are more dangerous in a tunnel, resulting in many metros
The same applies, but there are far fewer tunnels。
implementing their own specific approvals regimes to manage the risk
posed by equipment deployed in these locations.
High passenger numbers mean that controls need to be applied in the
This only applies where there are high passenger densities。
event of service disruption (e.8. by temporary station closure)。
Platform
screen doors are often provided on new metros
Reliable and audible public address (both on trains and in stations) is vital
Important; but less critical except where there are high passenger
to maintain passenger safety during emergencies and service disruption。
densities。
Robust voice communications between the control centre and the train
driver (orattendant) is vital too
Evacuation of passengers in tunnels is difficult, particularly if there is no
The same applies, but very little of the network is in tunnel。
side walkway
As
result, many metros include specific evacuation shafts
at certain locations.
These are typically equipped with systems to support
the evacuation of passengers under the supervision of operational staff
and the emergency services。
Contrglsystem
Modern systems use Communication Based Train Control (CBTC).
Most modern systems without lineside signalling use the European Train
Currently systems from different equipment suppliers are not
Control System (ETCS) or a near equivalent. There is a common
interoperable。
This is not a big compatibility issue because most metro
specification such that systems from different equipment suppliers are
lines are self-contained. Lineside signals are not necessary for normal
interoperable (i.e.each train only needs one set of equipment to
operations, but are sometimes installed (e.8. backup, running of trains that
communicate with any ETCS fitted infrastructure).
Positive Train Control
are not CBTC fitted)
PTC)in North America has similar functions
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Metro railway
Main line railway
Automation
Increasing use of high levels of automation, up to and including driverless
Increasing use of automation to support the driver。
and unattended operation. Elimination of lineside signals. Attended
operation enables automated driving, but provides an on-board human
presence to manage passenger safety and/or manually drive the train in
the event of failure.
See Automation section below for more details。
Automatic Train Operation (ATO) can improve capacity by consistently
The same principles apply, but are only significant where there are high
driving every train in a way Which minimises transit times between
passenger densities。
stations. This means that recovery margins do not need to allow for the
gifferilg grvingstylesgfalargenymberefdrivers
Data communications
Combination of highly directional aerials and radiating cables (leaky
Similar technology used in tunnels。
GSM-Ris the current standard in
feeders) to communicate between control centre and trains in tunnels。
Europe for secure communications with trains。
TETRA radio and Wi-Fi with robust coding are the commonly used systems
These systems are sometimes used to provide train fault reporting data
(often routed directly to the rolling stock maintenance location) and
customerinformation system updates:
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Metro railway
Main line railway
Voice communications
TETRA radio is the most commonly used system providing voice
GSM-Ris the current standard in Europe for secure communications with
communication:
trains, usually supplemented with track side telephones deployed at
Between control centres and trains
appropriate locations。
For station staff
For maintenance
Station radio is often provided by separate local spot systems rather than
Forincident response teams
using the GSM-R network。
Note that TETRA radio base stations are capable of continuing to provide
local service to radio users in the event of disconnection from or failure of
the wider network。
This resilience is a
feature oftheir role within
operational management of the station (particularly at large underground
locations).
Emergency Services radio system coverage is often provided throughout all
Emergency Service radio coverage is provided at
locations where a
underground locations (stations, tunnels and evacuation shafts).
This is
risk assessment has identified it as necessary, for example long tunnel
typically achieved by connecting dedicated emergency services radio
sections。
This may be provided on its own dedicated infrastructure or
eqyipment tothe metro'scverzge infrastrycture
ysing existing railway coverege infrastrycture fappropriate:
Stoppingdistances_
Relatively slow speeds, high braking performance and uniform rolling stock
Higher speeds and the variety of train types (including freight) mean that
mean that stopping distances can be quite short。
This enables a high
the signalling system needs to allow for long stopping distances on mixed
frequency of service
traffic lines。
Sgnals & Overlgps
Short stopping distances mean that lineside stop signals do not always
Lineside stop signals are almost always preceded by at least one caution
have to be preceded by a caution signal providing the sighting distance is
signal。
sufficient
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx
staff
key
key

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Metro railway
Main line railway
Dependability
Given the effect on trains and on passenger management of even short
These factors are important, but less critical apart from the most densely
duration failures, very high levels of system reliability and availability are
used sections of the network。
required. Robust hardware, equipment redundancy (duplication), remote
condition monitoring and fast system recovery can all be used to achieve
this.
Fallback capabilities to maintain operations also need to be able to be
implemented quickly.
Infrastructure
Often in tunnels or overhead viaducts, particularly in city centres。
Tunnel
very small proportion of route is in tunnels.
Most are quite short;
lengths can be very long:
except Where the routes pass through major mountain ranges or under
the sea
Grade separated junctions (e.吕: flyovers) are the norm in the areas of the
Similar considerations apply in the areas of highest frequency traffic, but
highest frequency traffic to increase capacity by avoiding conflicting
the majority of junctions are "flat" to avoid expensive civil engineering
routes
works and greater land take:
Usually completely independent of road or pedestrian traffic. Trains are
Level (grade) crossings for road or pedestrian movements across the
typically too frequent to allow realistic opportunities for crossing the
railway are common on many lines。
railway
Traction
Electric for avoidance ofair pollution and for high acceleration with high
Mostly electric or diesel. Benefits of regenerative braking are greatest on
performance motors. Regenerative braking for lower heat
in tunnels
electrified lines with frequent services so that other trains can use the
and energy_economy_
electricitygenerated。
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx
gain

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Automation
Grades of Automation
Metros can be designed to operate under several degrees of automation, ranging from nil (now unusual except for systems operating like
tramways) to full automation (with no staff member on the train)。
These are described by a number of Grades of Automation (GoA)。
Operationin
Grade Of
Type OTTrain
Setting Train
Stopping
Dooroosure
the eventor
Nutomation
Operation
In Motion
Traim
Osruption
Train
GOAO
Operator
Driver
Driver 
Driver
Diver
only
ATP with
GOAI
Train
Driver
Driver 
Drivef
Driver
Operator
ATP & ATO
GOA2
with Train
utomate
AUtomato
Driver
Driver
Operator
Driverless
Train
Traln
G0A3
Nutomate
Automatic
Attended
Attendant
Attendant
Unattended
GOA4
Train
utomate
Automatic
Nutomate
Mutomatie
Operation
The automation functions (ATP, ATO, ATS) are described below.
Mod.A Metro differences V5 .docx

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Automatic Train Protection (ATP)
The ATP sub-system delivers the limit of movement authority to each train. This determines where the train is permitted to travel based on the routes set
by the interlocking and the position of other trains. The ATP supervises train movements and ensures that
only occur on authorised routes, in the
correct direction and within the limits of the movement authority. The ATP ensures the safety of all train movements, irrespective of whether train control
is from the Automatic Train Operation sub-system or the train operator (driver). The primary ATP functions are as follows:
Trackside ATP equipment, most commonly found in signalling equipment rooms at stations and/or at control centres
Train location tracking
Movement authority determination to ensure safe train separation
Temporary speed restriction application
Emergency train evacuation supervision
Interlock train movement with platform screen doors, staff protection
switches (work zone protection) and platform emergency stop
plungers
Train borne ATP equipment
Determine the position of the train and report to the trackside ATP
Determine the status of the ATP sub-system health and which driving modes are available (manual, automatic etc )
Ensure the train does not exceed the movement authority limit
Ensure that train does not exceed the permanent or temporary speed restrictions
Train direction supervision
Correct side door enabling at platforms (door open control protection interlocks)
Supervise emergency train evacuation
Ensure all doors closed and locked prior to station departure.
Track-mounted ATP sub-system
Equipment mounted on the track (such as beacons/transponders) to provide a positioning reference; also used by the ATO equipment。
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx
they
key

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Automatic Train Operation (ATO)
This is the sub-system that drives the train between stations within the constraints established by the ATP sub-system . The functionality of the ATO will vary
depending upon the grade of automation. For GoA4 metros where no train operator is present, all functions performed by the train operator on
GoAl
metro are
performed by the ATO sub-system。
The ATO functions include:
Driving the train from station to station obeying permanent and temporary speed restrictions within the movement authority provided by the ATP
Train door and platform screen door open and closing
Platform dwell time management
Apply applicable energy saving driving strategies
Jog;, realigning an incorrectly stopped train to within the specified ATP door opening tolerance。
Selecting the appropriate driving profile for the line type, such as surface tunnel, wet etc-
Applying platform hold, train hold and station skip commands
Signalling and train control facilities in metro depots often are not provided, or
are Very simple。
However, it is becoming common on modern metro
systems (and in particular on driverless /unattended metro systems) to deploy the same signalling solution in depots as on the rest of the line to provide
ATP and ATO functions. This could include, for example:
Automatic routing of trains to and from storage tracks, to permit efficient scheduled and "on-demand" service build ups and reductions
Automatic close-up of trains on storage tracks
Automatic coupling and uncoupling of trains
Automatic cycling of trains through train inspection facilities or exterior car wash facilities。
Automatic Train Supervision (ATS)
The ATS sub-system is responsible for the overall line control function.
It is located at the control centre and it presents the state of the railway to the
operators。
It controls the trains, but the operators can intervene when the service deviates beyond the recovery capability of the ATS sub-system。
The primary functions of the ATS sub-system are as follows:
Issue commands to the interlocking and other sub-systems to route trains to their destinations。
Display the state of the railway to the operator, tracking trains and displaying the signalling equipment status。
Mod.A Metro differences V5 .docx
they

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Service regulation, adjusting the service to keep to the timetable or to equalise the interval between trains。
Provide the user interface for operators to adjust the service when needed
Alarm management
Provision of service information to customer information systems
Logging and playback for incident investigation。
Failure of the ATS sub-system should not directly affect the safety of passengers_
Automation benefits
The benefits of the various degrees of automation include the following:
Automation of the train driving functions can provide for more regular and predictable run times between stations, eliminating the variations
inherent with manual driving:
This can enable higher line capacity by reducing recovery margins Which partly allow for different driving styles。
Driverless and unattended train operation, with automatic passenger door opening and closing and with automatic train departure from station
platforms, can further reduce the variations in line operation。
Unattended train operation frees the metro operator of the constraints imposed by the need to roster train crews
It also provides the flexibility to
operate shorter trains more frequently. This makes it easier to respond to variations in demand throughout the
While still delivering a frequent
service
Unattended train operation, when combined with fully automated maintenance yards and stabling tracks;, provides the flexibility to respond to
unexpected increases in passenger demands by adding additional trains to the service, all without requiring additional train drivers or manual
intervention.
Lower operating costs
driverless trains
Automation of turnback at terminal stations can reduce turnover times, reducing the number of train sets needed for operation。
Automation oftrain regulation, train dispatching and train routing functions can more effectively regulate the performance of trains in relation to
timetable (schedule) and headway adherence
Regulation (e.8. to equalise the time interval between successive trains) can be achieved by
automatically adjusting dwell times and/or by automatically controlling run times between stations (e.8., through adjustments to train acceleration
and service brake rates, and speeds)
Automation of train regulation functions can minimise overall system delays by optimising the scheduling of each train。
Mod.A Metro differences V5 .docx
day
for

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
The automatic, real-time control and coordination of train acceleration, train coasting, and train braking can also be utilised to implement energy
optimisation algorithms, for example though coasting controls or by synchronising the acceleration of one train with the braking of another train to
maximise use of brake energy recovery.
Automated failure detection and response can be more effective in responding to system disturbances and emergencies through the elimination of
human error
There are some drawbacks to set against the benefits above。
Increased staff costs for any additional passenger service and security personnel
Additional capital and maintenance costs associated with the automation system itself
Additional costs arising from contingency arrangements to deal with failures and emergencies on unattended systems。
Control Systems
These range from systems with lineside signals observed by a driver to ones with full automation and no drivers。
Three common systems are described
below.
The more advanced systems will typically be able to deliver higher line capacity (i.e。
more trains per hour)
Lineside Signals with fixed block working
The diagram below illustrates the headway that can be achieved with 2 aspect signalling:
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
52 Limitof Control -Alltracks mustbe clearto clearthe 52greenaspect
Sighting point
52
51
RT
58
5
Hd
Sighting cistance (m)
Overlap length (m)
RT
Driver reaction distance typically 2-5secondsat V(m)
Train length (m]
5B
Service braking distance (m)
Hd
Headway distance (m)
Distance between signals {m)
Speed oftrain (m/s)
Cab Signalling with Coded Track Circuits
With cab signalling, headway is no longer constrained by the distance between lineside signals. Shorter headways can be achieved by the subdivision ofa
signal block into shorter sections。
Train speed is detected and controlled separately in each of these short sections, thus enabling shorter headways and
greater line capacity。
The track is divided into predetermined short track circuit lengths and each track can be fed with any one of a number of codes, each code signifying a
maximum safe speed, target speed, or for some metro systems, both the maximum safe speed and target speed。
The appropriate code for each track circuit is determined by the nearby interlocking depending upon the position of track occupancy ahead of any train, or
the requirement for junction or other speed restriction。
Modern systems typically use audio frequency signals to convey a specific command.
train traversing a track circuit picks up the coded signal from the transmitter via an antenna. The signal is decoded, and the actual train speed is
compared with the decoded track signal to determine if the train is above or below the authorised speed。
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Direction Of Travel
Traln 8
2
3
5
Train A
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
MIII7u
Block 5
Block loverlap
$
180 km/h]
Block 2 Overlap
(60 kmjhl
Block 3 Overlap
(30 kmjh)
No
Code
Code
Code
Code
Code
No
Code
Code
80/77
80/57
60/27
30/0
0/0
Code
80/77
Train B Driving Speed
MSS/TS
Train B Maximum Safe Speed
NISS;
Maximum Safe Speed (km/hl enforced by the ATP
TS;
Target Speed (km /h) for the ATO system to drive to
No Code:
There is no code present below and behind
a train in a block as the
code is transmitted from the exit end of the block and the train axles
short out the track circuit. No Code is interpreted as Stop。
Example OfATP code sequence in a track circuit based speed code system
Ifthe train speed is excessive the driver must reduce the speed to below the authorised speed or be subjected to an emergency brake action, generally to
standstill.
typical arrangement is shown in the diagram above in Which it can be seen that if the train is driven in accordance with the Target Speed
indications, it will be brought to
stop with one track circuit between it and the preceding train. Should the train fail to operate below the Maximum Safe
Speed profile at any time (and no corrective action is taken) the train will be automatically brought to a
within or before the 0/0 code track circuit. As a
train moves from block to block, the codes step up in the blocks behind.
Moving Block Signalling (loop & radio-based systems)
Moving block systems provided by Communication Based Train Control (CBTC) systems are now the preferred metro train control technology. The principle
ofa moving block system is that each train moves within its own allocated block。
A limit of movement authority is issued to the train Which defines the
point beyond which the train must not go.
This is usually the end of the route or the rear of the train ahead, whichever is encountered first. There is a
safety margin to account for rollback and errors in train location reporting. As the preceding train moves, so does the block, hence the name. The length of
Mod.A Metro differences V5 .docx
Stop

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
the block depends on the braking distance of the following train, so (unlike a fixed block system with lineside signals) a train can safely come to a stop very
close to the rear of a stationary train
Safety
Distance
鬣
Emergency brake profile
Service braketo rest
Stopping
Limit of
Position reference beacon
Point
Movement
Authority
Moving block signalling train separation
Moving block systems do not need traditional train detection sub-systems such as track circuits or axle counters, but some do have them to support mixed-
mode operations or to facilitate system recovery following a train location determination failure. Moving block systems require continuous communications
between the train and trackside to receive train position reports and provide updated movement authorities.
Two solutions are currently in use, inductive
loops and radio
Fully automatic trains
There are no technical reasons why trains cannot be driven fully automatically without the need for any manual intervention on board trains. The economic
and operational benefits of fully automatic operation are significant, largely due to the greater degree of flexibility in scheduling trains without the need for
arranging for drivers to be present at the correct time and place。
Trains equipped with a continuous form Of ATP and ATO are capable of operating safely and efficiently with minimal action by drivers or attendants. Generally
the role of the staffis to ensure that alighting passengers are clear of closing doors prior to train departure from stations and /or opening train doors on arrival
at stations。
Such functions can be automated, provided that equipment is installed to fulfil these roles safely and provide passengers With information Which
may have been provided had a driver been present. Such equipment may include:
additional CCTV equipment on station platforms to ensure passenger safety;
on track obstruction detection
equipment in-station areas (infra-red or radar systems);
Mod.A Metro differences V5 .docx

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
platform screen doors;
bi-directional voice communication between train passengers and control centre;
additional train systems monitoring and reporting equipment for diagnostic purposes。
However a trained human presence on the train can deal with failures and emergencies (e.8. by manual driving or passenger evacuation) and it is necessary
for a fully automated line to have processes for both passengers and trains to deal with these events
Metros operating fully automatic systems include:
Vancouver Skytrain
VALsystems (France and elsewhere);
Lyon Metro Line D
Mod.A Metro differences VS.docx