2
Ed RollingsBack to basics: Level crossings
In this, our latest, “back to basics” article we 
look at how signal and telecoms engineers 
have to consider more than just the 
movement of trains around the network. The article makes reference to factors which should be considered in the provision and 
operation of level crossings, although legal 
and cultural differences prevail in many countries which may override the generic principles set out in this article. 
Why do we need level crossings?
In some countries the railway came before roads 
while in others the construction of the railway 
divided land and roads where other rights had 
been established. Either way, it created the need for road and rail to cross each other. Level crossings vary considerably in type, often on the same railway, but members of the public may not appreciate the differences in operation as they 
just require a place to cross the railway safely if a 
bridge or underpass cannot be provided. Terminology
There are many different terms used to describe 
features of a level crossing around the world. Table 1 lists some terms associated with level 
crossings along with a description. Throughout 
this article we shall refer to ‘level crossings’, but they are also known as ‘grade’ crossings and ‘rail’ or ‘railroad’ crossings.
What is a level crossing? 
So having determined the need to cross the railway on the level we can start to define this as a ‘level’ crossing. The form of this crossing 
may involve simply designating a place using 
signs, for example, where visibility is good to see trains approaching. Railways in many countries do not have continuous boundary fences, so it is 
important to designate safe places to cross the 
tracks. Although not usually part of the signal engineer’s responsibility, the levelling up of the ground from the railway boundaries up to and in between the rails gives strength to the definition 
Road crossing application 
and technology varies 
enormously around the world. This is one of several different types of half barrier crossing in the UK. Half barrier crossings are less expensive than full barrier crossings and prevent users being trapped inside the barriers. However there is a risk of crossing users ‘weaving around’ the closed half barriers. 
 IRSE News |  Issue 276  |  April 2021
3
of ‘level crossing’. By contrast many footpath 
crossings do not have a built ‑up deck, relying 
instead on users to step over the rails. Vehicle 
crossings mostly need a deck to reduce the risk of vehicles getting stranded. The design of the deck 
will be informed by the types of vehicle or traffic 
using it, especially the vertical curvature or hump which could lead to vehicles becoming stranded where the body of the vehicle between axles 
comes into contact with the crossing surface (that 
is, becomes grounded). 
What does the law say?
Some countries insist on measures to manage risk of collision with a train, leaving the specific arrangements for the level crossing designer 
to decide based on risk. Others prescribe 
arrangements in detail; often a blend of these regulations will apply. In some countries it is 
the policy of the railway companies not to provide equipment unless required to do so by a 
government entity, as litigation may result where other similar crossings are not so equipped if there was an accident. 
In some cases, the costs of provision and 
maintenance of a crossing fall on the railway authority, sometimes the government or other public body will require actions and fund those, 
in other cases costs may fall to the private 
user or be shared. 
In some countries there are many different parts 
of law which can apply, especially where highways 
and road traffic is involved. Often different laws 
will apply for pedestrian crossings or for crossings between privately owned land such as farmers’ fields or access to a single house.Safety
Accident statistics demonstrate that level crossings are high risk sites for railway operators as well as 
contributing to large numbers of near ‑ miss events. 
The reasons for this high level of risk should be obvious to railway professionals who are familiar with recognising hazards, but level crossing users 
come from a broad spectrum of society who 
may not be familiar with the characteristics of a train operations, where long stopping distances are normal, and trains are unable to deviate from 
the line of travel. Monitoring of crossing use is 
important as patterns of use (and therefore levels of risk) can change significantly over time. In recent years, for instance, there have been major changes of traffic pattern in some areas due to 
the use of satellite navigation devices and the 
popularity of home delivery courier services.  
Selection of system
Where the law requires protection or warning systems to be provided, or the railway or other authority chooses to fund provision of equipment 
for their benefit or the benefit of the public, care 
should be taken in choosing the right combination of equipment to be safe and effective. Increasingly, convenience is being recognised as an important 
factor in system selection. Delaying users or 
trains has consequences, such as cost penalties either directly or in productivity loss and can lead to frustration which may result in users circumventing warnings.
Some railways have risk modelling tools to help 
choose equipment configurations that give the most effective risk reduction. Such tools also 
help to support a financial case for investment Active warning Warning or protection devices for road users which are activated by a train 
or railway staff.
Deck The support and surface area of a crossing which carries users and/or their vehicles.
Full barrier crossing A crossing fully fenced between road and railway when the road is closed. May use a single boom on each side or two half booms or equivalent 
equipment, e.g. gates. 
Grounding A vehicle stranded by coming into contact with the crossing surface/deck. 
Occurs when a long wheelbase vehicle traverses a crossing with a severe vertical curve or hump. This is often denoted by the sign on the left.
Half barrier A crossing with a barrier closing the entrance lane(s) of each carriageway only.  
Humped The vertical profile of a crossing where it rises in the centre – see also ‘grounding’.
Level Crossing A designated place where the public can cross the railway safely on the level. May also be known as a grade crossing, rail crossing or railroad crossing. It 
may include a sign or other equipment to assist the user. 
Passive crossing A crossing where the user is responsible for assuring their own safety by checking for the approach of trains. 
Protecting signal A railway signal used to authorise train movements over a level crossing.
Saltire St Andrews Cross or Crossbuck, commonly used to signify the presence of a railway crossing. This is shown to the left.
Wig‑W ag or 
flashing light signalA road traffic light signal with twin flashing red lights to warn road users 
of the approach of a train. May be used alone or in combination with barriers or gates.Table 1 – UK signalling 
terminology.
“Some countries 
insist on 
measures to manage risk of collision with  a train”
 IRSE News |  Issue 276  |  April 2021
4
in risk reduction and may include benefits to 
society through a reduction in lives lost or injuries incurred. 
A key input to the selection process is 
understanding the use of a crossing both by the railway and by users. A census of use taken 
over several days is helpful to identify all of the 
different types and numbers of users, and their characteristics. It is important to understand how long they take to traverse the crossing and whether users can pass safely if they meet 
on the crossing. What are the approaches like, 
can vehicles stop easily? Do vehicles approach at speed, or is there a likelihood of becoming stranded on the railway? 
On the railway how many tracks are there? Do all 
trains pass through at line speed or are there some trains passing at slower speeds? Is there a station or junction nearby which affects speeds? Do 
trains pass in the area or closely follow each other 
and therefore keep the crossing closed for long periods? Can visibility of approaching trains and therefore warning time be improved by removal of 
lineside vegetation? 
Pedestrian user characteristics may include 
mobility, hearing or sight impaired people; people with luggage, pushing cycles, or children/young 
adults or those with cognitive impairment who 
are less risk aware. Distraction factors such as mobile devices or moving in groups should also be considered. 
When level crossings are renewed these factors 
may have changed considerably so it is vital that a thorough assessment is made whenever a change is proposed to a crossing.
Historically many crossings were operated by 
railway staff. Automation is now common on some railways which makes crossings cheaper to 
operate and manage but this relies on increased 
knowledge and discipline on the part of users. Understanding human behaviour factors and the interpretation of warnings is a necessary part of selecting the best combination of equipment to assist users.
Some railways have dedicated level crossings 
specialists while in others it is a general signal engineering responsibility. Level crossing 
management extends to engaging with users 
to educate them how to use level crossings safely, especially when changes are proposed or implemented. This may be through school visits, media campaigns or local meetings with 
individuals or groups. 
Proposals to change a crossing or sometimes 
to renew it, may require consultation with 
stakeholders who have an interest. Typically, 
people representing interested groups such as the traffic authority, disability groups, the emergency services, planning authorities, or political representatives may contribute to these 
consultations and expect their views to be taken 
into account. Consultees may express views about safety, convenience, appearance, noise, lighting, accessibility, disruption during work, to list just 
some of the factors.
Technical protection or  
warning systems
The level crossings engineer has a lot of 
equipment available which can be configured to provide an appropriate solution. At the simpler 
end there are warning signs, or instructional 
signs. At the complex end there are complete barrier installations with sophisticated obstruction detection devices, which can identify people or 
objects on the crossing. These should have a 
high reliability and assurance of safe operation which allows them to automatically confirm the crossing is clear. 
Crossings may have gates or barriers. These are 
operated either by the railway or by the road user. The road may have lights, usually twin flashing red, which are accepted as an absolute stop 
An unprotected crossing 
in Chile. The safety of 
road user and the railway is very much dependent on the signs being obeyed.
“Some railways have dedicated level crossings specialists and in others it is a general signal engineering responsibility”
 IRSE News |  Issue 276  |  April 2021
5
signal, even by emergency services. Sounders 
may be provided to reinforce a warning and to 
assist vision ‑impaired users. The use of surface 
markings on a road or path to identify the safe place to stop is another feature along with signs and other carriageway markings to help the user 
navigate a crossing. Where railway signals are 
provided, they may be controlled to only allow trains to proceed when the crossing is closed and clear; they may also be interlocked to prevent the 
crossing being opened for road users once a train 
has been signalled until it has passed through or safely stopped. 
In some countries telephones are provided at 
some types of crossings to enable members of 
the public to seek permission to use a crossing. These are normally provided where the warning time obtained by visual means is less than the 
time needed to cross safely, and no other active 
protection or visible warning is provided. The telephones need to be protected from water ingress, vandal damage and located in a position of safety and with clear instructions on their use 
to cross safely. The telephones are normally 
‘direct lines’ to the controlling signaller. The signaller must only be able to talk to one crossing at any one time, and the crossing name must 
be displayed to the signaller throughout the 
call. There must be no overhearing, so that one crossing user cannot hear instructions intended for another crossing and the voice quality must provide clear communication. The identity and 
location of the crossing from which the call 
is being made must be clearly and accurately displayed to the signaller. 
There are number of problems with telephone 
crossings. The signaller may not have an accurate knowledge of where trains are in relation to the crossing. This can lead to misunderstanding of messages and increases the workload for the 
signaller. Signallers are trained to use ‘safety critical 
communications’ protocols but communicating with the public requires an additional skill set. The crossing user may not bother to use the telephone 
or may misunderstand the message being given 
and cross with a train approaching. With signal control areas getting larger and potentially more telephone crossings per signaller the risks become even greater. 
At some types of automatic crossing telephones 
are provided for users to alert the signaller if the crossing becomes occupied with a failed road 
vehicle. In such situations the telephone is the 
only way of protecting the crossing from an approaching train, assuming there is a protecting signal in the right place, or an emergency radio call can be made to the approaching train with 
time to stop. Such telephones must operate at all 
times and self ‑reporting fault monitoring can be 
provided to check the telephone is working.
Where a crossing is supervised the signaller may 
confirm the crossing is safe to allow trains to 
proceed by direct observation from the signal box 
or Closed ‑Cir cuit Television (CCTV) from a remote 
location. A crossing attendant may be employed to operate barriers or gates; this person would be provided with an indicator or other information to 
advise when a train is expected. 
Automatic crossings may not have signals 
interlocked with the crossing and instead rely on 
highly dependable safety features to ensure the 
crossing operates for each train. It is important that when a crossing operates there is not too much time before a train arrives, or an inconsistent time between the arrival of trains, which might 
otherwise encourage poor discipline by users 
who may attempt to circumvent the protection or ignore the warning. 
Automatic crossings are activated by the approach 
of a train and rely on train detection equipment; 
treadle, track circuit, axle counter or prediction device placed an appropriate distance from the crossing to guarantee timely operation. A crossing 
control device may be configured to deal with 
trains approaching from more than one direction. 
“In some 
countries 
telephones are provided at some types of crossings to enable members of the public to seek permission to use a crossing”
Quad barrier crossing  in the USA.
 IRSE News |  Issue 276  |  April 2021
6
Sometimes automatic crossings are provided 
with an escape route or clear exit to avoid users being trapped if the crossing operates when they 
are part way across. Unfortunately this leaves an 
opportunity for malicious or unsuspecting users to enter the crossing from the opposite direction when a train is approaching. 
On some lines it can be useful for train crew to 
operate a crossing, typically where line speed 
is low and only infrequent and less time ‑critical 
services operate. This introduces additional hazards, similar to where a signaller has to push gates across a road; this is really only suitable 
where road speeds are low and traffic infrequent. 
Train drivers may also be required to observe a crossing is clear after it has activated automatically but before passing over it. This is only practical 
where train speed is low and there is good visibility 
approaching the crossing, allowing them time to stop short if there is an obstruction.
In-cab signalling
Systems such as the European Train Control 
System (ETCS) in ‑cab signalling presents both 
opportunities and challenges for the operation and management of level crossings. 
Above, open crossing with 
lights in New Zealand.
Right, a pedestrian 
crossing in Melbourne, 
Australia.
Initially ETCS was only planned for high ‑speed 
lines where level crossings do not exist. As the 
use of ETCS has become more widespread, lines which have quite high populations of level 
crossings have been fitted. One feature of level 
crossing operation is the critical timing required. As ETCS transmits a movement authority to the train and the train reports its position 
there can be a small delay or even a loss of 
transmission in a message. 
While this can be accommodated in the course 
of normal train movement it becomes important 
where reporting the position of a moving train in 
relation to a crossing is concerned. A slight delay in triggering an automatic crossing could result in the crossing not being closed for sufficient time 
before the arrival of the train. 
Restrictions of speed can be embedded in the 
permitted speed profile to ensure that where users need a given number of seconds clear sight of an 
approaching train in order to cross safely this can 
be enforced precisely and cost effectively without 
additional line ‑side infrastructure.“On some lines 
it can be useful for train crew to operate a crossing”
 IRSE News |  Issue 276  |  April 2021
7
Automatic train operation
Automatic train operation is commonly associated 
with metros and other high density urban railways which do not have level crossings. Some heavy 
haul freight railways now use automatic operation 
of their trains over long distances. With remote management of the operation and driverless trains it is important that level crossing use does not 
impact the safety of the rail operation. Automatic 
operation of the level crossings is preferred. This is achieved, in some railways, through the use of predictor technology which allows for adequate warning times for road users and also ensures 
that the level crossing is open long enough for 
road users to clear the crossing once they have committed to crossing it. Obstacle detection equipment is used to identify any problem with 
the level crossing and in particular where road 
and rail intersect, which informs the train control system and revokes the movement authority through an emergency brake application. Where 
braking distances may be 2km or more advance 
notice of any problem is essential to manage the train to avoid a conflict. The ability to stop a train 
before a level crossing needs to occur outside the minimum stopping distance. Anything less 
than that is a situation that raises the likelihood 
of a collision. Future opportunities
Any prediction of the future will almost certainly prove to be wrong. However, there are a few foreseeable developments which will impact 
the future of level crossings. The introduction of 
Future Railway Communications System (FRMCS) may allow more use of wireless technology in the control and operation of crossings, with 5G 
likely to be used both for FRMCS and autonomous 
vehicle operation. Artificial Intelligence (AI) could be harnessed to allow learning from current operations and to improve our understanding of user behaviours. The use of AI derived solutions 
could prove challenging to safety validate. 
Self‑driving autonomous vehicles may have 
a significant impact on safety improvement 
where messages transmitted from the crossing may give advance notice to the road vehicle of 
the imminent operation of a crossing, possibly 
enforcing a controlled brake application. Radio communications could also be used to alert an approaching train if the crossing is occupied. 
These developments could reduce or eliminate 
human error or misunderstanding which contributes to many level crossing incidents.“Any prediction 
of the future  will almost certainly prove to be wrong”
A lightly used, yet fully 
equipped, crossing  in Switzerland.
Ed is a Chartered Engineer and Fellow 
of the IRSE with a MSc in Railway Systems Engineering and Integration 
from the University of Birmingham. 
His career began in 1977 as a signal and telecommunications trainee and he held various roles in British Rail 
Signal and Telecoms department 
including maintenance, design, and project support. In 1993 he joined Railtrack as part of a team preparing for privatisation before becoming signal engineer for the 
Midlands Zone on its inauguration as the 
infrastructure owner. 
His involvement with level crossings 
began in 1985 undertaking scheme 
development for signalling and level crossings projects. Ed held the post of professional head of signalling and technical lead for level crossings engineering with Network Rail, 
the GB main line railways infrastructure 
owner. Today he runs a company providing signalling and level crossing systems engineering consultancy. He 
also edits IRSE News Presidential Papers.
About the author ...