RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Railway Control & Communications Systems Management
Version 6
4
selection of fundamental concepts and methodologies
(This document is intended for candidates taking Module A of the IRSE Professional Examination.
It
is based onan extract from the 2018 Study Guide V1.3 for Module 7 of the IRSE Professional
Examination)
Introduction
railway is a complex system.
AlI parts of the system must work well together to deliver safe and
efficient outputs。
This means that all sub-systems and their interfaces with each other (and with
human operators) need to be carefully designed. Thinking about this should start at the beginning of
any project because once equipment is being installed, or is in use, it is usually impractical or
expensive to make changes。
This document outlines some of the principles and tools of systems management and their application
to the entire life cycle of assets
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx

1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
2
Project Life Cycle & Stage Gates
2.1 Life Cycle for the Project
Good systems do not just happen, they are designed and planned; and
achieve this when
their projects follow
disciplined procedure
This is often called a life-cycle and the
IV'
life-cycle
in particular will be discussed in the next section. This will look at the generic steps that a
project should go through in order to deliver a well-engineered solution。
typical project breakdown is shown in the figure below。
It divides the whole project process
from start to finish into a number of discrete steps or phases
Problem and
Roquiromonts
Dosign
Commissioning
Oporation and
Decommissioning
Solution
Implementation
Dofinition
Development
and Handovor
Malntonanco
and Disposal
Definition
Each phase:
Has a defined start point
Can be described in terms of its characteristics
Provides clear boundaries between its neighbouring phases
Defines the transition to the next phase
Has a clearly defined end point
2.2 Problem Solution and Definition
The problem to be solved should be clearly defined and articulated . The feasibility of the
potential solutions should be confirmed . The potential solution(s) to be pursued should
be selected on the basis of a systematic assessment and comparison of the proposals。
2.3 Requirements Definition
2.3.1 There are 2 parts to this:
The business requirements describing the change that is needed。
It is often
expressed in performance or monetary terms
The business sponsor would define
these with major input from operators and maintainers。
The system requirements Which are a technical response to the business
requirements. These describe in clear engineering terms What the system Will do。
2.3.2
As requirements are captured, there are certain items Which the project knows to be true
and upon Which it relies in order to deliver its solution. There are other items about which
it is not certain oris dependent on others to deliver, either as part of the project, or once
the solution has been put into service
These are called Domain Knowledge;
Assumptions, Dependencies and Caveats Which are defined as:
Domain Knowledge: Things known to be true: e.9. characteristics of signalling
typical adhesion values for steel wheels on steel rail;
Assumptions are statements made about items outside the scope of the
system under consideration, but are relied upon to be true in order for the
System to operate as expected. Once the facts are known an assumption will
either be deleted
Or
changed to become domain knowledge, a dependency
Ora caveat;
dependency is a requirement for someone or something else to act before
a task can be completed, e.9. if a project is
delivering new rolling stock, it
Would be reasonable to depend upon any necessary depot alterations to be
made;
Caveats are conditions that must be delivered after a system is put into
operation, e.9. for the same rolling stock project a caveat is that the vehicle is
maintained to design standards。
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
they
relays,

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
2.4 Design Development
This phase includes all the design activities that need to be carried out before the system can
be realised. The phase results in a design baseline
design set of documents and
drawings. The level of detail in the design is very dependent upon the disciplines
involved and the contractual
strategy adopted。
2.5 ImplementationlMigration
The Implementation phase includes all activities that are involved in realising the design,
including all construction works as well as the integration of electronic and mechanical
subsystems and delivering software and data_
The output will be a physical system
baseline and as-built documentation. Technical requirements need to be communicated
to detailed designers and manufacturers in the form of engineering specifications and
technical standards
2.6 Verification, Validation and Testing
2.6.1
Verification and validation should be done at the appropriate level. See section 3 foran
explanation of these terms。
For example; validation of a signalling system should be
undertaken at the system level,
whereas individual components would be validated at the
subsystem level。
2.6.2
The products Will normally undergo a comprehensive regime of testing, comprising tests
in the laboratory and factory environment and latterly in their target environment。
The
tests will seek to provide evidence to verify and validate that the products meet their
requirements and are fit for purpose and that the safety functionality has been correctly
implemented. This may include a set of routine tests for 'proven' products and more
comprehensive tests for newly developed items of equipment Testing may comprise the
following:
Unit testing
test carried out by the software developer to verify compliance
Of units of software with their requirements. The depth and extent of test
coverage Will depend on the safety integrity level (SIL ) of the item under test ;
Qualification testing
carried out by the hardware developer to prove correct
functionality of the hardware, and non-functional requirements, such as shock
and vibration, temperature and humidity, reliability。
Software functional testing
carried out by the software developer to prove
correct functionality of the software and that it does not exhibit any
unexpected behaviour or hidden faults;
Safety functional testing 一
carried out at all levels of the system assembly to
prove the correct
functionality of the safety functions under normal and failure
conditions;
Installation testing
a set of tests conducted on equipment installed in its
intended location and environment to confirm correct installation;
Integration test
carried out at a number of test stages to confirm that sub-
assemblies, products, subsystems and systems are correctly integrated to
ensure that
operate correctly together;
Interface testing
used to prove correct functioning of the interface between
two or more interfacing pieces of equipment;
Test and commissioning
testing on the installed system to ensure that it
performs the correct functions and does not have any hidden faults. This
phase of testing may also include testing to ensure that the principles of safe
railway operation have been adhered to (principles testing' ):
The final stage
confirms that the system will operate as expected With the surrounding
railway equipment with which it Will interface_
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
they

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
2.7
Commissioning & Handover
2.7.1
This phase includes all activities required to bring the system into full service; including
testing and commissioning for signalling and trial running of trains。
2.7.2
There are two linked but separate objectives:
To demonstrate that the system is ready to be put into service;
To demonstrate that the railway organisation is ready to accept the system
into service
This includes:
Training
Maintenance manuals
Operation manuals
Correct organisation
Spares
Planning
2.7.3 Acceptance and handover of the tested and commissioned system to the operatorluser
will normally require the satisfactory completion of a number of activities:
Safety approvals of the system including its operation and maintenance
systems by the necessary approval bodies;
Audit of test records;
User acceptance tests
acceptance through testing or trials that the system
meets its stated requirements and can be operated by the user;
Processes for checking the competence of staff who have worked on the
project;
Handover operations and maintenance (O&M) systems to the operator and
maintainer, including training, O&M manuals, relevant safety case information
and accurate
as built" records of the design (including version details for
traceability purposes):
2.8 Operations & Maintenance
This phase includes all activities involved with the normal operation of the system.
The
maintainer is responsible for the safe, Whole life performance of the system.
This
includes replacement of components and subsystems Within the system. This phase only
ends when the system is removed from service
Maintenance testing is needed to ensure that the equipment remains in a safe and reliable
state_
This includes testing after items of equipment are replaced by similar units。
Test
plans are needed to define the tests required。
Technicians doing these tests should be
monitored periodically to prevent bad practice or short cuts that omit vital parts of the
test。
A record should be kept of all maintenance tests
2.9
Decommissioning & Disposal
2.9.1
The Decommissioning and Disposal phase includes all activities involved in removing the
system from the railway。
For most signalling systems, decommissioning coincides with
or overlaps the commissioning of a new system.
2.9.3
The decommissioning or disposal of a system is as much a change to the railway as the
introduction or commissioning of a new system and should be planned and executed
with care
These activities must be planned and implemented so as to ensure the safety
ofany train operations that continue through the period of transition
2.10 Stage Gates or Decision Gates
The division of a project into discrete steps or stages, permits those working on the
project to stop and check that as
a Whole the project Will deliver What is expected of it. It
is all too easy for individual disciplines to become separated from the rest of the project
(particularly Where a project is delivered from multiple locations) and develop their
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx

1 RSE/
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
designs without consideration of how it must integrate with others
It is also possible for
projects to forget the original problem being solved and begin to move towards offering
something that does not meet the client's requirements。
2.11 Uses of Stage Gates
Consider the following when using stage gates:
Review the requirements that must be satisfied;
Provide objective evidence that these requirements are being met;
Confirm that designs comply (or will comply) with relevant legislation,
consents, agreements etc_
Look for opportunities to approve products or systems that are approved for
Use on other administrations (with similar functions, environment and
interfaces) without the need to examine evidence from first principles。
Determine that all applicable standards have been identified and any
necessary derogations applied for and f possible, granted;
Ensure that technical risks have been adequately captured, assigned to an
Owner;
appropriate mitigations identified and implemented;
Review the proposed design against the project costs Of the project;
Be assured that interfaces have been identified and properly designed so that
individual design elements will integrate and work together as intended;
Confirm that the proposed design can be constructed given limitations of
technology, available equipment and site conditions;
Review assurance evidence for each individual item of design;
Review the programme timescales and apply any remedial action should
delays be identified.
2.12 Engineering Approvals
Engineering approvals of designs, documents and products take place throughout a project's
life cycle, but stage gates are an opportunity to check that all engineering controls are in
place.
Project engineering controls are an essential tool to ensure the delivery of safe and
efficient outcomes
2.13 Cross-acceptance
The process of approving a new product or system can be more efficient if it is already in use
elsewhere (typically on another railway system).
This cross-acceptance approach for a
product will need to examine whether it is being used for the same function in a similar
environment and with similar interfaces to the remainder of the system. The quality and
scope of the acceptance process of the other administration is also relevant_
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx

1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
3
Verification, Validation and the V Model
3.1 Verification and Validation
Theseare
concepts in the process of ensuring that a project is delivering a system that meets the
client's requirements and is also fit for purpose
Validation. The objective of validation is to provide confirmation, through the provision of
objective evidence, that the requirements for a specific intended use or
application have
been fulfilled.
Verification. The objective of verification is to demonstrate that the requirements of each
life
phase have been fulfilled.
3.2 The V Model
3.2.1.A V-modelis a common
graphical representation (as shown in
below) of the
system engineering life cycle. The left side of the V represents concept development and the
decomposition of requirements into function and physical entities that can be designed, and
developed. The right side of the V represents integration of these entities (including
appropriate testing to verify that
satisfy the requirements) and their ultimate transition
into the field, where
are
operated and maintained.
The Vmodel can be viewed as a
timeline in the form of a "V"
The product moves sequentially from the first phase; "Concept",
to the next phase, "System definition and application conditions"=
etc_
3.2.2
Throughout the process, evidence will be gathered from a variety of sources including
the review of specifications and the results of actual tests
Fig。
Concspt
System Detition zd
Systm
Operztions zd
Dezommissianins
Xpplzation Conditions
Lczotance
Lhwtznauce
adDiooszl
Risk Jnalysis
TALIDATIO
Sstm
Sstm taliddton
Rzquirzlents
(wcludins3st
a2ceptncsand
Commlsslownsj
Apportionmznt o
Srstzl Rsoulraents
Desim and
Installztion
Iulyeutzton
Lmuacture
3.2.3. The principal advantage of the V-model is that it shows the relation of verification and
validation to the activities in the lifecycle and makes clear their role in finding defects atan
early stage and preventing the propagation of defects through the lifecycle。
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
key
Cycle
Fig:
they
they



1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
For projects incorporating a high degree of novelty or innovation the life-cycle may have to be
modified to include prototype testing or proof of concept。
4
Reliability, Availability, Maintainability and Safety (RAMS)。
4.1 Definitions
Reliability is the probability that an item can perform a required function under given
conditions for a given time period
Availability is the ability of a product to be in a state to perform a required function
under given conditions at a given instant of time or over a given interval
Maintainability is the ability of a system to be retained in, or restored to a state to
perform as required, under given conditions of use and maintenance_
Given
conditions would include aspects such as: location for maintenance, accessibility,
maintenance procedures and maintenance resources
Safety is freedom from unacceptable risk of harm_
The goal of a railway system is to achieve a defined level of rail traffic in a given time, safely。
For the demonstration of RAMS,
a RAM
Programme and Safety plan needs to be developed for
the project, so that during the system requirements phase, the following analysis needs to be
considered within the RAMS programme:
Failure Modes Effects Analysis (FMEA), fault tree analysis, for reliability;
Data analysis for availability improvement and prediction for availability;
Maintenance task analysis, personal safety procedures for maintainability;
Defining safety related functional requirements, establish safety management
processes
4.2 Systematic and Random Failures
4.2.1
The RAMS of a railway system is influenced in three ways:
by sources offailure introduced internally within the system at any phase of the system
lifecycle (system conditions),
by sources of failure imposed on the system during operation (operating conditions)
and
by sources of failure imposed on the system during maintenance activities
(maintenance conditions).
4.2.2
Failures occurring due to internal disturbances in the system at any phase of system
lifecycle are systematic failures or random failures_
Systematic failures occur due to
errors in requirements, design inadequacies, manufacturing deficiencies, software errors;
human errors in installation or maintenance, etc
Random failures oCCUr
to Wear out
over stress, stress degradation, environment, etc, beyond that which could have
reasonably been foreseen during the specification and design phases or due to failure of
components which do not match their intended specification because of deficiencies in
manufacture or quality control
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
due

1RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
5.
Security
5.1 Protection
against Cyber Attacks
5.1.1
From the point of view of cybersecurity, railway signalling and communication systems
have much in common With Industrial Control Systems (ICS, also known as Industrial
Automation and Control Systems, IACS). They comprise a combination of both cyber
and physical components, such as sensors and actuators and they incorporate
networking devices and communication protocols;
commonly have long service
lives, and comprise multiple generations of equipment from a Wide range of suppliers;
their software is often custom-written, using bespoke or older, unsupported operating
systems。
are both potential targets of cyber-attacks from sources such as Viruses;
hackers, organised criminals, terrorists and state-sponsored groups. Consequently,
cybersecurity for railway signalling and control applications can benefit
study of
good practice and standards in ICS。
5.1.2
For ICT (Information Communication Technology) system, increasing use of IP (Internet
Protocol) technology and commercial off-the-shelf operating systems in railway systems
makes it important to understand the architecture and specific functions of those
systems. Consider whether part of the system is networked , or whether there are
interfaces with other systems that are. Understand how these systems share data, and
What level of security is in place (passwords, encryption, firewalls, etc. ). A system is only
as Secure as its weakest line of defence
Where systems that have been designed
separately are connected together (such as railway ICS) a cyber analysis of the Whole
system should be carried out. Examples of cyber threats include web application attacks,
phishing through email, denial of service; malware. Consider whether important
passwords are secure, review the Use of USB flash drives, and establish an incident
response plan in case of an attack. The objectives of a cyber-attack may not be obvious,
and can range from causing injury or disruption, to undetected data theft and reputational
damage。
5.2 Cybersecurity Design Principles
5.2.1
The cybersecurity design principles listed below have been derived from the review of
best practice and existing sources and standards undertaken in the course of developing
European Technical specification addressing cybersecurity Within the railway sector.
Secure the weakest link. This design principle aims to push the designer to
consider the security of all the components of the system and not only the most
obvious, such as the protocols or the interfaces
Defence-in-depth (several diverse protections in sequence)
Fail secure (comparable to fail safe, but sometimes these two principles can be in
conflict)。
Grant least privilege (each component should have only those privileges to
accomplish its specified functions, but no more):
Economise mechanism (avoid redundancies and overlapping of functionalities)
Authenticate requests (check identity of users, human or devices)
Control access (grant access only to authorised entities (users, programs,
processes or other systems)
Assume secrets not safe (assume an attacker knows the details of the system)
Make security usable (avoid annoying and painful mechanisms)
Audit and monitor
5.3
Safety and Security
5.3.1
Safety and security have complementary goals but are sometimes in conflict over the
means to achieve their respective goals。
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
they
They
from

1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
In
safety, frequent changes should be avoided because of the cost of safety
demonstration
In security, update should be easy in order to be able to patch the
system in a timely manner。
From the safety perspective an emergency message (e. 9. to immediately shut
down Or
stop a system) should be transmitted as fast as possible and the
reaction should be executed immediately. From
security perspective the
message should be authenticated to prevent masquerade which might lead at
least to denial of service; but the calculation and checking of cryptographic codes
consumes time and leads to a
delay of the emergency message and the reaction
5.3.2
Trade-off between safe and secure design is not easy and it can be hard to find an
optimal solution. Safety and security are different and cannot easily be merged: security
cannot simply be regarded as an add-on to safety or vice versa。
The following principles
are aimed at
achieving
a harmonious relationship between security and
safety。
Safety and security are different and should be treated as such
The security environment should protect essential functions, including safety
Cybersecurity Threat & Risk Analysis is the main interface with Safety Analysis.
Separate security and safety as far as possible but coordinate them effectively
Security should be evaluated on the basis of international standards; e.9. IEC
62443
It is infeasible to evaluate the Security Risk probabilistically。
Safety and Security Target measures should not be coupled.
Security is a collaborative continuous effort
5.4 Protection
against Physical Attacks, Theft & Vandalism
Physical attacks, theft and vandalism are all potential threats to the safety and availability
of railway signalling and communications systems.
For defence in depth to ensure
cybersecurity the first barrier should be physical protection; With no trust on who can
access the hardware; there is no trust on the data。
Vandalism incidents include malicious
damage and arson_
Theft normally targets high value lineside equipment such as copper
cables. Both vandalism and theft can adversely affect safety by damaging equipment in
ways not seen as credible in the normal design process, e.9. by causing multiple
Simultaneous failures_
Measures to reduce risk include:
Fencing
CCTV
Cable alarms
Buried or secure cable routes
Fibre cable instead of metal
Security of equipment housings and rooms
Lighting
Movement detection
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx

1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
6
Obsolescence Management
6.1 Introduction
Items become obsolete When
Can no
longer adequately perform the function for Which
Were
created, or when there is a clear
advantage in changing to a new product or technology.
Three types
of obsolescence are described below _
6.1.1
Obsolescence affects all products and i impacts upon all stages of their life.
The term
includes:
Capital equipment;
Infrastructure;
Consumer durables;
Consumables;
Software products.
6.1.2
Obsolescence is inevitable and it cannot be avoided , but forethought and careful
planning can minimise its impact and its potential high costs_
The objective of
obsolescence management is to ensure that obsolescence is managed as an integral
part of design, development; production and in-service support in order to minimise cost
and detrimental impact throughout the product life cycle.
6.1.3
Obsolescence presents itself in three ways:
The item is no longer suitable for current demands; or
The item is no longer available from the original manufacturer; or
The item can no longer be maintained because people with the necessary
Skills are no
longeravailable。
6.2 Product Suitability
6.2.1
A
system or product is designed to meet the requirements of the project at
specific
moment in time
Additional functionality can be added to meet a future need.
This is
only
good idea 讦f that future need is clear andlor the extra functionality does not add too
much cost or complexity.
Otherwise it can add design complexity, add cost (including
design effort; manufacture and ongoing maintenance), reduce reliability and in the end,
may not be What is actually required。
6.2.2
There is
a need for products and systems to be 'future-proof' by which is meant minimal
changes are required to enable the product or system to continue in operation for as long
35
possible。
6.2.3
A good approach for 'future-proofing' is to take time at the start of the project
understanding What the user's needs are and how these might realistically change over
time
This is not a
perfect science; but careful consideration will ensure that all
reasonable options can be considered and costed, enabling the design to progress.
Issues that will need to be considered include:
Increases or decreases in demand;
Changes in supporting technology;
Changes in customer behaviour and expectations;
Legislation changes;
6.3 Item Availability
6.3.1
The availability of product parts reduces over time as manufacturers cease to make
them. Mechanical items can be remade 讦 the drawings are available (or can be re-
drawn). And depending on the application, the advent of 30 printing may ease the supply
of old parts_
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
they
they

1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
6.3.2 Electronic components, particularly semi-conductor circuits, are very likely to be hard to
Source as time moves on. Manufacturers move on to the next iteration of the item and
may cease its manufacturing altogether and make something new. It is also possible that
the manufacturer can cease trading.
6.3.3
In these cases, an alternative part must be found i the project or system is to remain in
operation. This requires as full an understanding as possible of the functions and
interfaces of the obsolescent item concerned so that a replacement can be properly
specified. For legacy items, this is often hard to capture due to Iack of appropriate
documentation and loss of staff knowledge (see below). Designers today, should ensure
that each item is properly documented to enable its replacement by something suitable in
the future should the need arise
6.3.4
The key functions include:
Operating environmental conditions (e.9. temperature; humidity, pressure;
power supply resilience);
Input timing considerations, particularly for microprocessor and memory
chips;
Storage requirements (e.9. temperature; shelf time
especially for batteries;
humidity)
Earthing arrangements;
Operating sequence; where the receipt of some information before other
information may be critical but undocumented;
6.4 Staff Knowledge
6.4.1 The failure to maintain sufficient corporate knowledge of a product (e.9. its history of
development, experience of in-service operation and failures, frequent faults and their
remedies) can lead to
a Ioss of knowledge about that product. The result can be a
reduction in reliability, poorly installed products, poor maintenance and badly applied
modifications.
6.4.2
This can be particularly relevant to software modifications, especially ifit has been
poorly documented
6.4.3
The skills of staff need to be maintained because some will retire or move to another
job. Training, comprehensive documentation and succession planning are tools to
address this
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx

1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
7.
Configuration Management
7.1 Configuration management follows four main principles:
Each piece of information or product is uniquely identified, not just by type;
but as a unique item in its own right.
Each piece of information or product can have a status associated with it, and
record of its history.
The component parts that make up a product or system can be listed, and
associated together. Documents can also be similarly related. Examples are a
set of requirements documents for a system, or plans for related sub-projects。
Associations between elements of a Wider system can be captured , so that x
one item changes, then it is known that another must also change。
7.2 Configuration management consists Of four basic elements
Identification.
Change Management
Status Accounting
Audit and review
7.3 Identification.
Set the identification system for each configured item
This will not
necessarily be the same for each item
Documents will almost certainly need a different method
from products for example. Thought should be given to the creation of a document tree; and
product list.
7.4
Change Management。
Changes have to be managed, otherwise people will be
working from different sets of uncontrolled information, resulting in costly delays later on in the
project. There needs to be a change control process that ALL changes go through. A system of
Version control is needed for both hardware and software
But the change process should also
take into account the different needs of major and minor changes, so that changes are given
the appropriate scrutiny and then authorisation_
Baselines provide a useful means of controlling
the issue of information, particularly where there are several pieces of information that are
related (e.9. various different product specifications for one system). This enables others to
Work
a common set of information, and all changes and their impacts to be compared
against a known position. Finally, any information that is out of date; must be withdrawn, and
the change management process should enable this to take place and to demonstrate that is
has occurred
7.5 Status
Accounting.
This provides a View of the current status of configuration items
(number of changes, those pending, actioned etc )
People can see What changes have
occurred,and when
occurred
can also see Which proposed changes have been
rejected。
7.6 Audit and review
There is often pressure to deliver the job now and update the
documents later. In the long term, this attitude can be costly to
project. Performing audits and
reviews
challenges people to adhere to the process_
It also provides
a record that the process
has been followed.
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
from
they
They

1 RSE/
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
8
Use of DRACAS and FRACAS
8.1 Introduction
The terms DRACAS (Defect Recording, Analysis and Corrective Action System) and
FRACAS (Fault Reporting, Analysis and Corrective Action System) are often used
interchangeably. While
overlap;
are different。
FRACAS specifically addresses faults and failures, ie
When something is no longer
performing its intended function. Such a system would typically be used by a maintenance
organisation to manage and record in-service failures. Analysis of these failures can lead to
quicker repair times as common faults can be highlighted and appropriate repair mechanisms
Or
preventative measures putin place。
DRACAS has a wider remit, embracing not only faults, but other incidents and observations
which, combined with faults, provides a richer picture of equipment performance and can lead
to a
significant improvement in reliability. Such a system would typically be used by a design
organisation as the item under consideration is developed for in-service operation. It may also
be used by a maintenance organisation. It is good to start using a DRACAS as early in the
lifecycle as possible to capture defects as
OCCUT
throughout design。
8.2 Defect Recording
Fault Reporting
8.2.1
The first step in the process is to record the defect (or record the fault). The initial details
necessary are:
Observed defect
fault
The effect of the defaultlfault on the operation of the equipment and,
讦
relevant, the safe operation of the railway;
Date, time and location of where and when the defect was first observed;
Details of what was happening at the time;
Details of the equipment involved (type, model, manufacturer, serial number;
software version)
Details of personnel involved;
Details of the person making the report;
8.2.2
The report record then needs to be stored. Supporting this should be a process that
takes the recorded information and makes it available for relevant personnel. Such
personnel could include:
Designers;
Maintainers;
Operators;
Safety engineer。
8.2.3
The information should then be used (alongside data from previous faults) for analysis
and corrective actions to improve future performance_
3-Apr-23
Systems Management article
VG.docxSystems Management article
VG.docx
they
they
they