Page 1 Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications 
and Related Systems  
An introduction for candidates taking Module A of the IRSE Professional Examination  
Kimberley Chang,  February 2021  
 
The railway  system is made up of various subsystems which interact to deliver the required outputs, 
normally the movement of passengers and freight.  The way these systems interact all have a role to 
play in the safe and efficient running of the overall railway.  Railway control and communications  
systems are designed and operated  whilst taking into  account their interact ions with related 
systems . This article gives an overview of the interfaces and interactions between railway control 
and communications systems and the  related subsystems in the railway environment.  
Prominent subsystems are:  
• Signalling ; 
• Telecommunications ; 
• Operations , including control centres, passenger information and public address systems;  
• Drivers;  
• Rolling stock ; 
• Permanent way  / track – including the rails, fasteners, sleepers and ballast / slab track as 
well as on -track train detection & monitoring systems;  
• Civil Engineering structures, including bridges, tunnels and stations ; 
• Electric traction supply;  
• Electric power systems ; 
• Evacuation systems.  
During the life of a railway system, changes will be made either to enhance its capac ity and 
capability, renew life expired assets or add new services. When making changes to one part of the 
system it is essential that the impact s of the change on o ther parts of the system are considered if 
the overall system is to continue to perform its functions safely and correctly.  
Interfaces  and Interactions  with Operations  
Control Centres and Signallers  
The railway is controlled by signallers at signalling con trol centres  who  input their instructions via a 
control device, such as a computer screen, control panel or lever frame  into the interlocking . After 
checking the instructions are safe, the interlocking pass es the instructions on to the trackside 
infrastruc ture. It is important that the state of the infrastructure is feed back to the signaller in the 
form of indications on the computer display screen, indications panel, positions of the levers or by 
simply looking out of the window!  
The interfaces with the s ignaller are described in more detail in the Back to Basics Article  “Operator 
Interfaces” (IRSE News, Issue 269, September 2020) . 
Train Describers  
To set the correct route for a train, the signaller needs to know the identities of the individual trains 
as they enter, pass through and leave the control area. Each train is allocated a train reporting 
version 2 - April 2023
Questions for the Certificate (Module A) will not be set on the text which has been 
struck through but will be set on new reading list editions nos. 24, 25, 26 & 27
Effective from October 2023 exam
Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 2 number , to identify the train . The train reporting number allocates each train a unique identity 
which m ay be base d on a combination of the train  type , destination , operating company and an 
identity number .  
The train reporting numbers are initially entered into the system by the operator , which may be a 
signaller, or depot controller  at the start of the tra in’s journey . The train describer then uses 
information  from the interlocking about the status of the signalling system to “step” the train 
through the control area.  At the fringes of the control area, the information is passed to adjacent 
train describers  via a telecoms link. 
The train reporting numbers can be manually altered, or interposed by a signaller  if required . This 
may occur when a train has reached the end of its timetabled service and needs to start a new one , 
when a train divides to form two se parate services or two trains join to make one.  
The train describer system is not safety critical, as the interlocking protects trains from unsafe 
movements if a train is misrouted . 
Passenger Information & Public Address Systems  
A passenger information system delivers real -time information to passengers about the nature and 
state of the railway.  The customer interface usually  consists of : 
• visual information display screens  at stations and on trains;  
• audio announcements at stations  and on trains ; 
• mobile phone applications ; and  
• railway operator or travel planner websites.  
Passenger information and automated public address systems usually take their inputs from the 
train describer and the timetable information to create  real-time dat a. More information on 
passenger information systems  can be found in the Back to Basics article “Telecoms Part 2 ” (IRSE 
News, Issue 271, November 2020).  
Interfaces and Interactions with Drivers  
There are several  train -borne systems that perform the role of interfacing between the signalling 
system and the train driver.  
Automatic Train Protection  
Automatic train protection systems  are designed to prevent  or mitigate the consequences  of trains 
passing signals at danger, over -speeding or overrunning buffer stops.  Examples include : train stops 
on metro systems, the Automatic Warning System used in UK and Australia , or the European Train 
Control System .  
An automatic train protection  system take informatio n about the status of the signalling system, 
such as signal aspects , issued movement authorities  or permissible speed information . The system 
automatically intervene s if trains are travelling too quickly  to safely stop at a signal at danger or 
buffer stop,  or decelerate  sufficiently  for a speed restriction.  The intervention may consist of an 
alarm and/or visual indication in the driver’s cab, or go further and automatically apply the brakes 
until either the train has slowed sufficiently or stopped completel y, depending on the system 
installed.  
Automatic Train Operation  
Automatic Train Operation  is used to help automate the operation of trains and can vary in the 
degree of automation offered . This varies  from no automation at the lowest level, to full 
Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 3 automation, including starting and stopping of trains, operation of doors and handling of emergency 
situations . It is primarily in use in metro systems, but is becoming more widespread on mainline 
railways.  Automatic Train Operation takes input from the signalling  system to determine how far 
ahead the line is clear, and trackside beacons that transmit brake commands to the train . The train’s 
on-board computer  calculates the required the braking curve to bring the train to a stand  at the 
correct position in platform s or at junctions . The braking calculations are updated frequently to 
ensure accuracy .  
Driver Advisory System  
The d river advisory system  aims to optimise the driving of the train, saving energy and improvi ng 
performance. The system consists of a control centre subsystem that evaluate s timetable 
information and routing strategies , and sends the processed information to the train. The train’s on -
board subsystem  uses this information to calculate  energy effici ent speed profiles to achieve train 
timings and issues advice to the driver.  Some of these systems are static, so the information is 
received by the on -board subsystem at the start of the journey, whilst others are connected to the 
control centre subsystem during the journey and updated dynamically  via radio.  
Secure Train to Signal Box Radio  
Secure train to signal box radio  (including GSM -R) is used to communicate between the train and the 
control centre. The driver is provided with a n in-cab termi nal which can be used to display and send 
messages  or voice communications between the driver and operational staff.  More information on 
secure train to signal box radio systems can be found in the Back to Basics article “Telecoms Part 1” 
(IRSE News, Issue  270, October  2020) . 
Interfaces and Interactions with Rolling Stock  
Braking Characteristics  
The braking characteristics of the rolling stock vary between train  types , with some having much 
better braking performance , such as modern passenger trains , than others , such as heavy freight 
trains.  Signals are required to be positioned such that the space between the first caution signal and 
a signal at danger  is sufficient for all train types authorised to run that route , with  sufficient warning 
to stop  (plus a safety margin ).  
 
In some cases, the  signal spacing would allow for trains with better braking performance to run at 
higher speeds than others, whilst still maintaining sufficient distances between signals. In these 
cases  those trains may be permitted to travel at a higher speed .  
The braking characteristics of the rolling stock authorised to run on a route also impact on  signing of 
maximum permissible speeds.  Where there is a large reduction in maximum permissible speed , 
sufficient warnings for the speed red uction needs to be given for the train s to slow to the lower 
speed. This may be via lineside signage, or restrict ive signal aspects  to force a train to slow down.  

Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 4 The braking characteristics of trains impact on the design and efficacy of automatic train pr otection 
systems. Some tra in protection systems evaluate train speed against the distance to a speed 
restriction or signal at danger  and intervenes or sounds a warning if the train is travelling too quickly  
to brake sufficiently.  
For trains fitted with in -cab signalling systems, movement authorities are issued  via radio and 
displayed in the cab for the driver . The train ’s on -board system  calculates braking curves using  speed 
restriction information , train current position and speed , train braking characteristics  and the 
distance to the end of movement authority.  The system warn s the driver of possible over -speeding 
and may intervene  by applying the brakes  to slow the train  if it is necessary . 
Definition of Track Clearance Points  
With track -based tr ain detection systems, such as track circuits, treadles or axle counters, the 
position of the train is determined by the positions of its wheels. At the front and rear of a train or 
locomotive, there is an overhang between the end of the train and the  near est axle. At junctions or 
conflicts, the position of axle counters or insulated rail joints need to be positioned  account ing for  
the overhang  so that the signalling system can detect a train fouling an adjacent line.  
 
Interfaces and Interactions with Perm anent Way  
Gradient  
Gradients affect the ability of trains to accelerate or decelerate  because  gravity acts on the mass of 
the train.  The ability to maintain safe train  separation needs to take gradient into account , which 
affects the lineside signal spacing  or the limit of movement authority in in -cab signalling applications.   
Where gradients are fallin g in the direction of travel (downhill), the spacing between signals needs 
to be increased to allow for longer braking distances. This is of particular importance for freight 
trains. Where gradients are rising (uphill), the spacing between signals can be reduced  due to 
shorter braking distances.  
Positioning a signal at the bottom or part way up a steep rising gradient should be avoided  because 
of the time taken to accelerate and possible wheel slip during poor adhesion conditions. This is 
particularly important for heavy freight trains or where trains may be required to stop frequently.  

Page 5 Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Contro l & Communications and Related Systems 
In metro systems, sometimes the stations ar e designed to be at the top of a risin g gradient. This 
helps to reduce braki ng effort to stop the train and th e consequential heat generation from braki ng. 
Curvature and Cant 
Track curvatur e impacts a train driver’s ability to see a signal, particularly in an urban environment 
or underground where there are considerab ly more obstructions. A straigh t alignment means that 
drive rs can see the signal from some distanc e away. This may also have its own problems, 
particular ly where there are shorter sign al sections and it becom es possible for the driver to see 
several signals along the line of route and read on e further away in error. This problem may be 
mitigated by adjusting the intensity and rang e of th e signals so that sign als that ar e further away 
appear less bright until the train is sufficiently close. 
Another problem arises where there are several lines running in the sam e direction and it is difficult 
for a driv er to iden tify which line the sign al appli es to. This problem can be mitigated by placing 
signals parallel to on e another , by providing additional reading distan ce for the signals, or by 
mounting signals on the oth er side of th e lin e to incre ase separation between signal aspects. 
Cant is th e slop e of th e trac k across th e rails, wher e the out er rail of a curv e is positioned higher 
than the inn er rail, providing a banked turn; thus allowing trains to mov e through the curv e at a 
high er speed than would otherwis e be possible. This consequentially affects the maximum 
permissible spee d on the line, signal spacing and required sighting distan ces. The cant can cause 
issues with cable routing or, at level crossings, uneven cross track profiles for road users.  
Switches and Crossings 
Switches and crossings, or sets of points, allow trains to change between lines or tracks. The switch 
is the part of a crossover that physically moves whereas the crossing is the fixed element of the 
crossover. The blades of the switches are moved via a series of rods by electric point machines or 
hand-operated mechanical levers. 
A simple set of points consists of four rails. The two outside rails (stock rails) are fixed . The two 
inside rail s (switch rails)  can move from side to side at one end . For a train to safely pass through a 
set of points, one side of the switch must be phys ically touching the stock rail and the other switch 
rail must allow sufficient space for the train’s wheels to pass between it and the other stock rail. 
The crossing section of a set of points is usually a cast lump of metal which allows breaks in the 
runn ing rails sufficient to allow the flange of the wheels to cross the running rail of the other track.  A 
check rail help keep the train’s wheels on the track where there is a risk that the train could move 
laterally.  The check rail simply guides the wheel by applying a barrier to the wheel.  
A common arrangement of points connects two parallel lines of a double track railway . This 
combination is known as a ‘crossover ’ and both point ends are often worked together under one 
control  so that they are  always  in correspondence with one another , that is, both set for the straight 

Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 6 route, or both set for the route over the crossover.  Crossovers , and some other arrangements of 
crossings are illustrated on the next page.  
 
Simple crossover between two parallel lines.  
  
Flat crossing, where two low speed lines cross. 
There is no useable connection between the 
two lines.  
 
Switch diamond, for higher speed junctions. 
There is no useable connection between the 
two lines.   
Single slip, where two tracks cross and it is  
possible to move from one line to the other.  
Double slips have a slip on each side.  
 
Point Machines  
Points can be controlled by direct connection to a control lever, such as in a mechanical signal box or 
ground frame, where the movement of the points are  under the direct control of a human.  
More commonly, the points are driven by a point machine, powered  by an electric motor or 
hydraulic system , with the movements controlled by the interlocking . In both cases , when the points 
are in use, they are required  to be locked in  position, so that the points cannot be moved by the 
signalling system or the vibration of the train . This  is particularly important when they are facing 
points and helps to prevent derailment and damage to the points . 
The interlocking must know the position of the point blades , to check that the points are in the 
correct position for the safe movement of trains and have not  failed or become obstructed.  An 
individual detector rod  is attached between the point blades and point machine  that proves the  
position of the point blades by making the appropriate contacts within the point machine. If the 
blades are out by as little as a few millimetres , the rods will not be in the correct position and will 
prevent the contacts operating.  The state of the contacts is fed back to the interlocking so that the 
signalling system is aware of the lie of the points.  
Other types of point machine exist  that apply locking and prove point lie in different ways , but the 
requir ement for  locking and detection of p oints  is essentially the same.   
Catch /Trap  Points  
It is sometimes necessary to derail a train deliberately to protect against potential collis ion with 
another train.  
Catch points  are designed to derail anything running against the normal direction of traffic, such as 
loose wagons that have no or ineffective brakes and have “run away”. The spring catch point  
consist s of one point blade, normally open in the derailing position.  A train moving in the normal 
direction will push the point blade closed against a spring  and continue unimpeded. A train moving 
in the wrong direction will derail at the spring catch.  Another type of catch point is the wide -to-

Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 7 gauge type, consisting of two switches that work in opposite directions  with the switches either both 
open or both closed. These  are operated by the signalling system  and a train travelling over these 
points whilst in the open position will be derailed.  
 
Trap points protect lines from  trains on adjacent lines that have passed a signal at danger, typi cally 
at the exit from sidings or freight loop lines. The y are controlled  by the interlocking, with locking and 
detection of point lie  fed back to the signalling system.  
 
Junctions  
Where t wo railway lines meet , there is potential for conflict between trains. Signals, or limits of 
movement authority  are required close to junctions to prevent trains traversing the junction when it 
is not safe to do so and to authorise trains to traverse the j unction when it is safe.   
Signals are usually placed with a safety margin (overlap) between the signal and any potential points 
of conflict to protect trains traversing the junction from a train overrunning  one of the protecting 
signals due to an error in braking judgement.  It is undesirable for signals  to be placed at very long 
distances from the junctions because this would reduce the junction capacity due to the increased 
time  required for a train to clea r the junction after being given a movement authority . 
Track -Based Train Detection  
Train detection systems are described in more detail in the Back to Basics Article  “Train Detection – 
the Basics” (IRSE News, Issue 261, December 2019).  
Other Rail-Mounted  Equipment  
Other equipment than can be placed on the track/ between the rails includes:  
• Axle counters . These count the number of axles passing over a given point.  They are 
clamped to one of the rails and their location can be constrained by, for example, the  
presence of check rails or third rails for traction power.  
• Train protection systems. There are many different systems , but all involve track mounted 
equipment sending information to the train by electrical, magnetic or physical means.  
• ETCS (European Train  Control System), CBTC (Communications Based Train Control) and 
automatic driving systems.  These typically require equipment fixed to the sleepers between 
the rails to transmit to or receive information from trains.  The equipment  can include 
beacons or tra nsmitters (often known as balises or transponders) and loops of cable.   

Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 8 • Hot axle box detectors . These consist of infrared scanners that measure the abnormal levels 
of heat generated by failing bearings in axle boxes. Failed bearings cause the axle to seize 
and can cause derailment , so early detection is essential.  
• Other items can be fitted to the sleepers rather than the rails such as beacons for on board 
train announcements or speed restrictions and loops of cable for coded track circuits.  
Interfaces and Interactions with Civil Engineering Structures  
There are many  structures around a railway line, either  form ing part of the railway  or forming  the 
surrounding environment.  Sometimes the position, size or nature of those structures impact on how 
the signalling system is designed, constructed , maintained  or operated.   
Tunnel s, Viaducts  and Bridges  
Tunnels impa ct greatly on the ability to p osition signalling and telecoms equipmen t. Sometimes this 
is unavoidable, such as with the  underground metro systems found in many cities worldwide.  It is 
preferable for trains not to stop within tunnel s or on viaducts  due to the risks associated with 
evacuating a train  in th ese places . Where reasonably practical to do so, signals are placed so that no 
part of the train is within a tunnel , viaduct , or anywhere else with limited  clearance.   
Tunnels and viaducts also pres ent a challenge for the installation and maintenance of equipment, 
due to difficult access  for staff, particularly if the tunnel or viaduct is long.  
Limited clearance within tunnels can make it very difficult t o place signals clear o f the train ’s 
kinematic  envelope , and this is sometimes managed by us ing special , smaller  tunnel signals . 
The ability of a driver to see signals at  the minimum reading distance can be adversely affected by 
the walls of the tunnels, particularly if clearance within the tunnel is tight, or the tunnel is curved . It 
can be  difficult for a driver to see the aspect displayed by a signal against a sunlit background if it is 
placed close to the exit of a tunnel, especially if the tunnel is long  or narrow . 
Bridges can also affect the ability of drivers to see signals immediately beyond it, as they  may be 
obscured by the walls or span of the bridge .  
Stations and Lineside Buildings  
If a passenger train is stopped at a signal and any part of the train is within a station platform, 
passenger s may attempt to board or alight the train . This is a particular problem if the train’s doors 
are not centrally locked.  For this reason, stop signals are generally  either positioned at the end of 
platforms or at least a train length beyond the end of the platform. Signals placed at the platform 
ends are preferably 20 -25m from the stopping position of the train so  that they can easily be seen by 
the driver when the t rain is stationary . 
A driver must be able to read, interpret and understand a signal aspect  for a sufficient distance on 
the approach. However, buildings, platform furniture, waiting shelters, canopies and passenger 
standing on the platforms can adversely affect this, particularly if the platform is curve d. To aid the 
driver, an additional signal  can be  provided on the approach to the station, or part -way along the 
platform to give the driver an early indication of the next signal aspect.  
The proximity of platforms to the railway line can make installation, inspection and maintenance of 
lineside equipment difficult. Where practical to do to, equipment such as train detection equipment 
are placed clear of the platforms  so that staff can work on equipment in a position of safety.  
Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 9 In built up residential areas, where noise may be a problem for residents nearby, unnecessary 
railway -related noise must be kept to a minimum. The audible alarms on level crossings may sound 
at a lower level at night, or restrictions on the use of train horns on the approach to footpath 
crossings ma y be imposed , enforced by signage or regional / national operating instructions.  
Other Limitations on Signalling Equipment  
Other structures that can also impact on the sighti ng of lineside signals include electrification 
gantries, large signal gantries  or pipe bridges . 
Trains should not stop on level crossings unless it is unavoidable, so signals need to be positioned so 
that they would not cause a train to obstruct the crossi ng when standing at the signal. Vandalism is 
also a risk at level crossings,  so all equipment should be a sufficient distance from the crossing, 
ideally placed beyond security gates and anti -trespass guards / devices.  
Interfaces and Interactions with Elect rification and Power  Systems  
Traction Power Supplies  
 Traction power is delivered by means of an overhead wire or at ground level via a  third  (live) rail 
close to the running rails , and collected by the train by a roof -mounted pantograph or rail -level pick-
up shoe.  To create a complete circuit, there is a traction return , which can take several forms . 
Third or Fourth Rail Electrification  
Where traction power is delivered by a third rail, the return current is carried by the running rails, or  
alternatively via a fourth conducting rail.  The latter mechanism can be seen in the London 
Underground  or Milan Metro.  
One of the difficulties with using one of the running rails for traction ret urn is that the running rail 
may also form part of the signalling train detection circuits. In this case there is the need for the 
signalling equipment to be able to distinguish between the traction current and the track circuit 
current . Train detection bo undaries must also allow the traction return current to flow past the 
boundary to the next track section, but prevent the flow of track circuit current  across the boundary . 
For more information on how this is achieved, refer to the Back to Basics article “ Train Detection – 
the Basics” (IRSE News, Issue 261, December 2019).  
Overhead Line Electrification  
Early versions of overhead line electrification also used the running rails to carry the traction return 
current. A major issue with this is that any conduct or carrying a current generates a magnetic field 
that can induce a voltage in nearby cables, particularly if they run alongside the conductor for great 
distances, as i s often  the case with signalling and telecoms cables.  To overcome this, the running 
rails can be electrically bonded so that the return current is shared amongst all running rails in the 
vicinity, reducing the current in each individual rail . This reduces t he level of electromagnetic 
interference in the signalling and telecoms cables. An a dvan tage of this is that traction current takes 
multiple paths so, in the event of a rail break, the traction return can return to its source  by an 
alternative path . 
To reduce the amount of electromagnetic interference, a dedicated return conductor wire is 
provided , running parallel to the overhead line at approximately the same height.  The return 
conductor is bonded to the running rails so that it carries some of the traction return current.  The 
current in the return conductor flows in the opposite direction to the overhead line , so the 
electromagnetic fields generated by the return conductor partially cancels that generated by the 
Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 10 overhead line.  The current carried by  the return conductor is weaker than the overhead lines, so 
there is still potential for interference in the lineside signalling and telecoms cables.  
Electromagnetic interference in lineside cables can be reduced further by using  booster 
transformers, whic h force  nearly all of the traction return current from the rails to the return 
conductor . This increas es the distance between potential sources of electromagnetic interference  
and other lineside cables , and consequently reduc es the level of interference between them . 
 Neutral Sections  
Sources of traction power (feeder stations) need to be electrically insulated from one another , so a 
neutral section is provided where no traction power is supplied.  This is sufficiently long to ensure 
that no train can be ele ctrically connected to two separate supplies simultaneously , but not so long 
that a train will not have enough energy to reach the next live section.  
It is important that the signalling system is designed such that no train ever comes to a stand within 
a neutral section , as any electric train would not be able to accelerate away again.  
Immunisation  
The effects of induction in signalling circuits can be limited by designing the signalling circuits and 
equipment to be immune from the unwanted currents. This is particularly important in the design of 
train detection systems where track circuits are used. In areas of AC electrification, DC track circuits 
may be used , and vice versa . Alternatively, AC track circuits can be used that have no harmonics in 
common with the traction curren t, enabling the track circuit receiver to distinguish between the 
track circuit current and any traction current that may be present in the rails.  
Signal Sighting  
Overhead line equipment  can affect the ability of a train driver to read and interpret lineside signals 
and signs  when they are obscured by equipment, even if just  momentarily . This is a particular 
problem where overhead line mas ts are  on the inside of curves  and may be overcome with the use 
of cantilever structures for the overhead line masts  or alterations to the positions of signals  and 
lineside signs.  
Equipotential Bonding  and Earthing  
To protect lineside signalling equipment against contact with the traction supply , either directly , 
such as whe n overhead wires come down, or indirectly , such as when other equipment is made live 
by an electrical fault, signalling equipment is bonded to earth .  
In areas electrified by overhead line , any metal equipment beneath or near the overhead line is 
bonded to a running rail carrying traction return current so that if the wires carrying the traction 
current were to fall, the equipment is earthed  via the running rail , protecting the equipment from 
damage and staff and public from electric shock.  
In third/fourth rail electrified and non-electrified areas it is not usual practice to bond all metal 
structures to the traction return rail.  
Signalling & Telecoms Power Supplies  
Signalling and telecoms power supplies must provide a constant, stable supply for the correct 
operation of equipment. It must also be safe for the staff to work on , with measures in place to 
protect staff and the public from electric shock under fault conditions . 
Signalling equipment within apparatus cases must be earthed to protect staff and equipment from 
electric shock from contact with exposed conductive parts, su ch as circuitry, and other conductive 
Interfaces and Interactions between Railway Control & Communications and Related Systems  
 
Page 11 parts that could be made live by an electrical fault. Other protective measures include enclosing high 
voltage equipment in insulated units, providing insulated covers for live parts  or insulati ng 
conductors . 
Signallin g and telecoms equipment is commonly powered by a dedicated supply , and may be backed 
up by an uninterruptible power supply in case of failure of the supply point, to allow time to change  
to an alternative supply .  
Interfaces and Interactions with Evacuation Systems  
Signalling systems must be designed to minimise the risks associated with emergency evacuation of 
trains or railway infrastructure. The system should be designed to minimise the risk that an 
evacuation takes place in an area where it is difficult for passengers to exit a stricken train . It is also 
important that access to the site is possible  for emergency services and rescue teams to provide 
assistance. For this reason, signals within tunnels, viaducts or steep cuttings are avoided if pr actical 
to do so.  
The signalling system may also be required to respond quickly to protect a hazard, such as a train 
crash or fire. In many cases, train s involved in an incident may  already be protected by the signalling 
system . However , there may be a req uirement for passengers to exit the train in a hazardous area  
(or indeed they may do it contrary to instructions) and the signaller will require a mechanism for 
protecting the site  – by replacing all signals in the area to danger or sending an “all trains stop” 
command via the radio , for example . Emergency communication and signalling intervention is 
essential to prevent further problems or disaster.  
 