I RSE /
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Back to basics: Points
Part one
Francis How
with contributions from John Alexanderand Trevor Bradbeer
This is the latest in the IRSE's "Back to basics
series of
articles, aimed particularly at helping people preparing
to take the Certificate in Railway Control Engineering
Fundamentals (Module A) of the IRSE's Exam, and
those Who are new to the industry or the profession of
railway signalling。
This article is about points and is in two parts. Part 2
Will follow in IRSE News March 2022. Points have been
mentioned previously in the Back-to-Basics series but
have not been covered in any detail until now. There
are seemingly endless varieties of points and point
operating mechanisms around the world,and it is not
Figure 1
Profile of wheels on a pair Of rails, illustrating the flanges-
possible to cover them all. Instead, we Will focus on the
principles and common practices, with some examples。
Terminology varies considerably as well; we Will use the
part of the wheel below surface level. The wheels of railway
term 'points; throughout; but points are also referred to
Vehicles have flanges; which is the part ofthe wheel which
as 'switches and crossings' (SGC)and 'turnouts'.
runs on the inside of the tracks and serves, in extremis, to
prevent the vehicles derailing
see Figure 1.
One of the joys of SGT engineering is that it embraces
a broad
range of engineering skills. Many articles in IRSE News explore
For these reasons, points have moveable sections ofrail, both
high-tech topics such as software;
IP networks
Cyber security
to provide a continuous railhead for the train to travelin the
and artificial intelligence.
At the other end of the spectrum lies
intended direction,and to provide gaps in the rails where
the mechanical engineering of points, with the signal engineer
required so that the flanges can pass through。
quite literally involved in the nuts, bolts and grease of keeping
On most railways, the points trackwork is the responsibility
points operational. You can be an SGTengineer at either end
ofthe track (permanent way) engineer, and the signal
of this spectrum
Or somewhere in the middle
and a few
engineer is responsible for providing and controlling (via
even manage to be knowledgeable about allof it!
the signalling system) the means of moving the points, and
for ensuring that the points are in the
required position
Whatare points and why do
before
a train is permitted to pass over them_
This division of
railways need them?
responsibility is not universally true; however,and in some
As soon as
railway becomes more than a simple piece of
railway administrations the roles and responsibilities are
track
connecting Aand B, requiring junctions to connect
allocated differently。
with other lines Or
sidings, then points are a necessity. They
comprise fixed and moveable rails that guide a train from one
Points are used to enable trains to diverge from the 'straight'
route ahead, onto another line;
Orto stay on the straight route
track to another。
When trains traverse
a Set of
points in this manner
are
Roads have junctions as well, of course; but self-evidently
said to be
travelling over the points in the 'facing' direction。
there are no moveable parts, and it is worth briefly considering
Points can also be used in the opposite direction, of course;
Why railways are not the same. Firstly, road vehicles can steer
Where two lines converge and become one. Trains using
themselves whereas trains cannot,and
therefore require
points in this manner are said to be travelling over them in the
something to guide them in the intended direction. Secondly,
'trailing' direction
see Figure 2. Many points are used for both
the wheels ofroad vehicles sit on the road surface; with no
facing and trailing movements_
13
BACK
TO
BASICS
they
they

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
Figure 2
Facing and trailing directions of movement
over a set of points_
Facing
Trailing
Figure 3
The principal parts of a typical set of points。
Stretcher bars
Closure rails
Switch rails
Check rail
Stock rail
Wing rails
Straight route
Position of
switch heels
Stock rail
Check rail
Common crossing
The basic design of points
Common crossing (also known as a 'Frog' or
Vee' crossing)
Before going much further, we need to understand the
is the part of the track layout where the switch rails converge
Ofnecessity, there is a gap in the rails here so that the Wheel
principal parts of a set of points. The main components are
shownin Figure 3. Again, terminology varies somewhat, both
flanges can pass through. The existence of a gap can however
from one country to another and depending upon whether
create problems, particularly on long turnouts, and we shall
youare
a track engineer ora signal engineer. So please excuse
return to this subjectin Part 2.
US if We Use
terminology with Which you are not familiar or
Closure rails are
non-moving sections of rail that connect the
even Which you consider to be incorrect!
switch rails With the common crossing:
Various terms are also used to describe the position of points
Check rails
Also known as guard rails, these are short sections
In Britain, and in some other countries, When the points
of rail positioned alongside the stock rail to ensure that the
are set for straight route
are said to be in the
normal'
wheels follow the correct route through the common
crossing
position, and When they are set for the diverging route;
(frog). It can be seen in Figure 3 that there are similar rails
are in the
'reverse' position. This terminology dates from the
alongside and forming part of the common crossing:
These
of mechanical lever signal boxes; when
a leVer Was said
are known as Wing rails (sometimes these are manufactured as
to be in its normal position when it had not been pulled,and
part of the common crossing rather than being separate rails).
in its reverse position when it had been pulled. Alternative
terminologies for normal and reverse;, which are used in other
Stretcher bars are provided at intervals between the two
parts of the world, include left/right, positive/negative and
switch rails to help ensure that the correct distance is
direct/diverted _
maintained between them not just at the tips but throughout
their length. Note that railways in many countries do not use
The key components of the points shown in Figure 3 are:
stretcher bars, although
are used in Britain and some
Switch rails (also known as blades ortongues) are the movable
other countries whose railways are based on British practice。
Where
are
provided, the number of stretcher bars is
rail sections which
guide the train along the straight or the
fit
governed by the length of the switch rails, Which in turn is
diverging route. They are tapered at their tips so as to
Closely to the adjacent stock rail。
determined by the maximum permitted speed of trains taking
the diverging route
Stock rails are the outer running rails for the straight and
diverging routes
The tips of the switch rails move up tight
Switch heels are the demarcation point between the movable
switch rails and the fixed Closure rails。
heel block assembly is
against the stock rails When in the closed position for route set。
positioned in the vicinity of each heel to maintain the switch
closure and adjacent stock rail in the correct relative positions。
14
Diverging
route
they
they
days
they
they

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
Extended sleepers
(bearers)
Stock rail
Switch rail
Stretcher bar
Switch rail
Slide chairs
Stock rail
Figure 4
General layout of a set of points
Photo Shutterstock/Timofeev Vladimir
Allthese components work together to guide a train along
disastrous for a train. Before reading further, you might like to
the correct route. Ensuring that a train can traverse points
think for yourself what the principal hazards are_
Ifnot orto
safely and smoothly, with minimum wear and tear on both
check your answers,
are:
the wheels and the track
means that the design of points is
Points not fully in correct position for the safe movement
complex matter, particularly Where points are very long (for
of a train. For facing movements, this is likely to resultin
high-speed turnouts)
derailment. For trailing movements derailment is unlikely,
What Figure 3 does not depict, but which can be seen in
but damage may occur to the points or associated
Figure 4,
are the supporting elements for the rails. These
trackside equipment
include extra-long sleepers Which support the rails. Sleepers
2_
Points in the opposite position to that required for
are known in some parts of the world as bearers, ties or
safe movement ofa train. For
facing movements; this
Cross-ties_
The rails themselves sit on 'chairs', as does rail on
Will result in the train going on the wrong route; which
plain line; of course. Where the switch rails move, the chairs
may have consequences such as derailment as
a result
support both the stock railand the switch rail.
These are
ofexcessive speed,
Or collision with another train. For
slide chairs',and as Wellas
holding the stock rail in position
trailing movements, the train might derail or, more likely,
they also have a flat surface over which the switch rails move
SeVere
damage is caused to the points and the associated
laterally. To aid movement these surfaces are usually greased,
trackside equipment。
or fitted with plastic inserts to reduce friction, or with rollers
3
Points moving as a train passes over them. For
facing
Which lift the switch rails Very slightly While
IoVe_
moves, this is very likely to result in derailment ofallor
Operational hazards associated
part of the train. For trailing movements, it could result in
with points
derailment but is more likely to cause damage to the points
and associated trackside equipment。
So far
We have not said
anything about how points are moved
Excessive speed. This may result in derailment_
Most points
and held in position for the passage of a train. This is where
the signal engineer comes in! But before we discuss this;
We
have; by their
nature;
one position which involves a
should consider the operational hazards associated with a set
relatively tight radius curve, corresponding to the diverging
Of
points. Clearly, a section of rail that can move is potentially
route_
There is generally no super-elevation or 'cant'
on
the diverging route through the points to help the train
negotiate the curve (unlike plain line curved track).
Railway wheels and tracks
The mechanics f how
a Wheel stays on the track are
Ifyou like railway history, you may be interested in exploring
complicated,and are beyond the scope of this article
how the wheel-rail interface evolved from its origins in the
but it is worth noting that in normal running on plain line
earliest horse-drawn wagonways where the wheel surfaces
(including curves), the track and the wheels are designed so
were flat and ran in grooved wooden
'track", then later
that ideally the flange does not come into contact with the
Where the guiding flanges formed part of the metal track。
inside of the rail. Instead, the concave/conical wheel profile
rather than being part of the Wheels, through to the most
Serves to
each
of wheels running smoothly on the
modern systems which are
capable of safely guiding trains
head (top) of the rail.
travelling at very high speeds。
15
they
they
Very
keep
pair

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
5.
Track gauge is incorrect for safe movement of a train. This
When signal boxes began to appear; the points were operated
is likely to result in derailment. The fact that part ofthe
by moving a mechanical lever in the box. Each point lever Was
track is moveable means that there is a somewhat greater
connected via
rodding (or sometimes wires) and cranks to the
risk (compared with plain line) of the track becoming 'wide
tips of the switch rails of the associated set of points
See
to gauge', because of lateral outward movement ofthe rails
Figures 5and 6. By pulling the lever to the reverse position in
caused by the passage of successive vehicles or trains。
the lever frame, the rodding moved in one direction sufficiently
6
Broken and worn rails. This may result in derailment_
to move the points into the reverse position. Restoring
The switch blades and the common crossing have less
the lever to the normal position returned the points to the
metal to support the wheels,and both the switch tips
normal position.
and the crossing receive more impact from the Wheels,
Because ofthe weight and the effort required to move the
which may cause rails to break. Switch and stock rails also
rodding and points via the points lever, the distance from
wear through use, especially Where heavy traffic uses the
signal box to
mechanically worked set of points is quite
diverging route。
Excessive Wear can lead to derailment。
limited (typically to ~200-300 metres)
The risks associated with the first three of these hazards are
controlled principally through the signalling system, of which
Power operated points
We shall say more shortly.
Examples of mechanically-worked points can still be found
in many parts of the world, but all modern signalling systems
The fourth hazard is usually controlled by a speed restriction
use power-operated points
Most commonly this takes the
that applies to trains taking the diverging route; reinforced by
form ofan electric motorin What is knownas a point machine
controls in the signalling system.
These controls may include
(also knownas
a switch machine or switch motor). The
route andlor speed indications and aspect controls that
point machine is located adjacent to the switch blades and is
instruct/remind the driver to slow down,and train protection
connected to the tips of the blades either by two rods (one for
systems Which enforce speed reduction in the event
each blade) or by a single rod and a bar which links the two
Ofdrivererror。
tips, ensuring
move in synchronism
The bar is commonly
The risks relating to the fifth and sixth hazards are controlled
known as a 'lock stretcher bar'. Figure 7 shows a point
principally through track inspection and maintenance
machine; with the drive rod connecting the electric motor via
gears to the blades. As the motor turns, the rod moves to the
The role of signalling in point operation
left or the right, moving the points to the normal or reverse
The role of signalling in the operation of points is to
position respectively. Note that there are other rods also
fulfil three basic functions,and
are achieved jointly
shownin the diagram
we shall discuss their purpose shortly。
by the interlocking and the trackside equipment, as
There are many types of point machine in use; With Various
described in Table 1
drive arrangements linking the motor to the switch rails_
That
The interlocking features relating to points were described
shownin Figure 7 is just one example
Alayout in a training
in tWo previous 'Back to basics' articles (IRSE News, Apriland
environment is shown in Figure 8, where the point machine is
2020),and itis not the intention to repeat them in this
mounted on extended sleepers, and as With mechanical points
article. This article focuses instead on the trackside signalling
soleplate (extended stock rail gauge tie) maintains the gauge
equipment that moves; locks and checks the points
and the distance between the track and the point machine_
Point operating mechanisms
Over the years, alternative types of powered point operating
mechanisms have been produced. Some use hydraulic
Manually operated points
actuation, such as the clamp lock (other similar devices are
When railways first began, the practice Was for railway
known as chair locks, claw locks and ground locks) _
The clamp
personnel to operate a set of points
using
a lever beside the
lock has a hydraulic power pack instead ofan electric motor,
track. Examples of this can still be found in sidings。
with hydraulic rams (jacks) positioned between the sleepers to
drive the switch rails to the normal and reverse positions_
Table 1
The main signalling functions associated with a set of points_
Function
Fulfilled by
Move the
points to the required position for
A trackside point operating mechanism Which, under the controlof the
the passage ofatrain
interlocking, moves the switch rails to the required position. The mechanism
is usually mechanically, electrically or hydraulically powered , although some
railways use pneumatic power。
Check that the points are in the
Atrackside mechanism which detects whether the switch rails are correctly
correct position。
positioned and locked (see below) for the safe passage of the train. Often, but
not always an integral part of the point operating mechanism (see earlier)
The detection of the position of the switch rails is used by the interlocking:
Prevent the
points moving until the Whole of
locking mechanism Which holds the switch rails securely in the required
the train has passed safely
position for the train. Again often, but not always, an integral part of the point
operating mechanism
In addition, the interlocking has safety features that prevent power being
transmitted to the point operating mechanism when there is a route set overa
set of points and when there is
a train actually on the points.
16
they
they
May

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
Figure 5
Points rodding leading from the signal box (out of picture, to the
Figure 6
Close-up of a rodding run for several
right) to a set of points, with cranks that are used to transmit the motion of the
sets of points (a wire run for signals is on the left)
rods through a right-angle。
Photo lan J Allison。
Photo JJohn Francis。
Drive rod
Stretcher bar
Point machine
Extended sleepers
Facing point
lock rod
Sole plate
Lock stretcher bar
Circuit controller and
detection contacts
Detector rod
Detector rod
(left-hand switch)
(right-hand switch)
Figure 7
Typical point machine with its connections to the switch rails
(schematic only; not intended to be an accurate representation) _
Image Trevor Bradbeer。
17

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
C3
Figure 8
Atypical point machine arrangement (in a training school environment) showing the drive rod, detection, FPL
rodding connections, and associated stretcher bars. Image Trevor Bradbeer and Signet Solutions。
A further variant is the 'in sleeper' (also known as 'in bearer)
How detection Works
mechanism, where all the machinery is contained within
a box
The positions of both switch rails are detected, firstly to be
ortrough which takes the place of a conventional sleeper. This
sure that the tip of the closed switch rail is sufficiently close to
means there is little or no equipment above sleeper level, thus
the stock rail that a wheel
flange could not pass between the
making it easier to undertake mechanised track maintenance
two rails; and secondly to be sure that the gap between the
Without risk of damage to the equipment.
stock railand the open switch rail is sufficient for the wheel
It is also Worth
mentioning an example of an innovative
flanges to pass through。
approach to point operation which has featured in IRSE
In the case of point machines, detection is achieved using
News (most recently in
2019). "Repoint'
WaS a
project
rods that are attached to the tips of the switch blades, which
undertaken by the University of Loughborough (UK) to
operate electrical contacts in a detector box adjacent to
consider afresh the failure modes of points and to develop an
the track as the switches move left or right. In many point
operating mechanism that was more reliable; just as safe, and
machines, the electrical contacts are inside the point machine
would help improve track capacity.It illustrates that innovative
ratherthan being a separate unit
See
Figures
7and 8_
These
thinking still has something to contribute to an issue as basic
are called 'combined' point machines. In the case of hydraulic
as point operation.
clamp locks, the contacts are in boxes attached to the outsides
ofthe stock rails_
Checking that pointsare
correctly positioned
The electrical contacts for both switch rails are combined into
The second signalling function associated with points (listed in
points detection circuits, the outputs of which are fed back
Table 1) is to detect the position of the points. This is necessary
to the
interlocking via fail-safe relay circuits ora high integrity
because it cannot be assumed that the points will move to
transmission system. Hence the interlocking knows whether
the position to Which
have been called. Ballast or other
the points are normal; reverse orinan indeterminate state
(neither normal nor reverse)
debris could obstruct the movement, for instance, preventing
the switch rail closing against the stock rail。
A power failure
Where points are worked mechanically via rodding, a Wholly
or malfunction of the point operating mechanism could also
mechanical detection system is often used.
The detection
prevent the movement
rods are connected to sliding metal plates Which engage with
In the situation where the points do not need to be moved
similar slotted plates at right angles Which are connected to
for the route being set, it cannot be assumed they are still
the wires that operate the mechanical signals. This ensures
safely in the correct position for the next train. The passage
that the wires leading to the signals cannot be operated unless
of the previous trains might have caused the points to
the points are correctly set, and vice versa. Hence there is
open
slightly, through vibration, wear or mechanical
direct interlocking of points and signals at the trackside; in
failure forinstance_
addition to the interlocking of the levers in the signal box. You
can just about seean example of such a device near the top
left of Figure 5.
18
C
May
they
Very

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
Detection tolerances
This leads to two key observations. Firstly, the requirement
The permissible gaps between the switch and stock rails vary
recognised that points traversed in a facing direction present
slightly from country to country, but on
a standard gauge
a much greater hazard than in the trailing direction; and
railway the gap on the closed switch rail side must typically be
secondly, the hazard was originally perceived more in relation
no more than
Smm, and on the open switch rail side it must
to signalman error than the points having an excessive gap
be at least
I15mm (these figures
alsO
depending
between the closed switch and stock rail because of poor
upon the type of points and operating mechanisms). If these
adjustment, track movement or wearand tear The risk of
Criteria are not satisfied, the detection circuits Will indicate to
signaller error in relation to points movement has now all but
the interlocking that the points are not correctly positioned
disappeared as a consequence of comprehensive interlocking
Tolerances are generally assigned to these values
both to
of points, tracks and signals. However, the requirement to lock
allow some latitude when
setting up or maintaining the
facing points on passenger lines remains in most countries
points and to reduce the risk of the closed switch detection
in the world and serves to minimise the risk of derailmentin
being intermittently lost due to track vibration or slight
the vicinity of the blade tips. Furthermore; in practice many
movement
Thus, forinstance
one railway administration
railways lock the points for movements in the trailing direction
states that the closed switch detection contacts must just be
as Wellas facing, and also lock
points on freight-only lines。
made at a switch-stock rail gap of 4mm (but not less) and
The extreme
dangers associated with facing points can be
definitely broken at Gmm.
Seen
throughout the history of railways_
As With so many safety
Detection ofthe open switch may at first sight appear to
features on railways, accidents led to the introduction of facing
be less critical than the closed switch, but there have been
point locks_
In Britain there was for many years an aversion
accidents such as at Kingham (1966) and Grayrigg (2007)
to having
points at all, something Which reached its
both in Britain, where the open switch rail gap was insufficient。
heightin 1873 when
a north-bound express train derailed on
The continual battering by the backs of wheels caused the
points at Wigan station. Thirteen people died as
a result ofthe
open switch rail and fittings to be fatigued, causing fractures
points moving under the train (not, in this case; by the action
leading to derailment。
The condition of the stretcher bars Was
ofthe signalman but because of the excessive speed of the
implicated in both accidents, incidentally.
train). The accident brought to the fore the need to fit locks to
facing points. Even in relatively modern times points-related
Locking the points in position
accidents have still occurred. Examples include Potters Bar, UK
The third and final signalling component of points operation
(2002), Grayrigg, UK (2007) and South Carolina USA (2018).
is the physical locking of the points in the required position,
How points are locked
to minimise the risk of the switch rails moving: The
As With detection, the facing point lock mechanism varies in
locking mechanism is known as a 'point lock'or
'Facing
Point Lock' (FPL).
design for mechanically-worked and power-operated points。
It is instructive to start by looking at mechanical points
See
Why do we lock points?
Figure 9.
A lock stretcher bar connects the two switch blades
In Britain it has been, from relatively early railway
legal
It has two slots cut into i When the points are in the required
requirement that points used by passenger trains in the facing
position, the signaller pulls the FPL lever This is a separate
direction are fitted with a lock. The Board of Trade's 1892
lever, not the same one as is used to move the points
The
requirements relating to the opening of new railways stated
lever is connected via rodding to the lock rod, driving it into
that
'In order to ensure that the points are in their proper
one ofthe two slots in the lock stretcher bar. There is one slot
position before the signals are lowered, and, to prevent the
for the points in the normal position, and
a second forthe
signalman from shifting them; While a train is passing over
reverse position
them,all
facing points must be fitted with facing-point locks。
Figure 9 -A
point lock on a set of mechanical points
Image Trevor Bradbeer。
Port where Iock
rod engages
Lock stretcher bar
When points are in
opposite position to
that shown
Lock rod
Rodding coming in
Sole plate
from FPL lever
in signal box
19
may
Vary
facing
days;
facing

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
It can be seen that when the lockis
engaged in one of the
In the case ofa
clamp lock, the locking mechanism is different
Slots
i is impossible for the switch blades to move, either
although its purpose is the same. Trying to explain how a
by the signaller attempting to move the points lever or by
clamp lock Works is not easy
it is easier to understand by
Vibration as a train traverses the
points. Figure 9 also shows
seeing one in action! In essence; there is a G-shaped lockarm
the metal soleplate (also known as the stock rail gauge tie)on
(sometimes called
a Claw) attached by a pivot to the inside
Which the lock and the two slide chairs are rigidly mounted
ofeach switch rail. The hydraulic rams move the switch rails
to prevent movement and maintain the correct gauge at
via the drivellock slides and the lock arms,and eventually the
the switch
free end ofthe lockarm on the closed switch side is forced
Up SO that it fits tightly against the outside of the stock rail。
Moving on to power-operated points, although some railways
The switch and stock rails are thus physically clamped to each
use point locks which are actuated by a mechanism separate
otherand cannot be moved unless the clamp lock is powered
from that which moves the points, more commonly the lock
to the
opposite position
see Figures I0and 11.
is part of the point operating mechanism. In the case of point
machines, the lock is usually contained within the machine. If
Some point operating mechanisms have a
different
you look at Figures
and 8 you Will see that one of the rods
type of lock. For instance, the UK High Performance Switch
coming out of the point machine is connected to the mid -
System (HPSS) utilises a lead screw (which moves the
point of the lock stretcher bar. Inside the point machine the
blades normal and reverse) combined with a brake; thUs
rod is connected to
lock mechanism. As the point machine
preventing any movement of the blades when they are in the
completes the point movement (either normal or reverse)
required position.
i engages the lock mechanism, so preventing the rod, lock
In power-operated points, the detection circuits referred
stretcher barand switch blades
moving until the point
to earlier also include electrical contacts to prove that the
machine is powered up again to move the points to the
lock has engaged. Thus, When the detection circuit informs
other position。
the interlocking that the points are normal or reverse, this
Figure 10
Typical clamp lock installation.
information is, in effect confirming that the closed switch is
Photo Francis HoW。
against the stock rail, the other switch is sufficiently open, and
the switches are locked in position。
It can be seen from What We have considered so far that
modern point machines, clamp locks and similar devices
combine the functions of point movement, detection and
locking in one trackside device. Taking the example ofa
conventional point machine
typical sequence of operations
for
moving the points from normal to reverse is as follows:
Motor starts turning When powered from the interlocking:
2.Point lock disengages by the action of the motor. As soon
as this starts to happen the normal detection circuit is
forced to break (even though the switches are still normal
at this stage).
3.Switches are driven to the reverse position by the
action of the motor.
4. Point lock engages by the action of the motor
5. Reverse detection circuit is energised, provided the lock
has successfully engaged and both switch rails have fully
moved to the reverse position.
6. Power to the motor is switched off by contacts on the
circuit controller inside the point machine (the interlocking
also disconnects the power to the points when reverse
detection is obtained).
7.The motor is electrically braked by 'snubbing' contacts on
the circuit controller (somewhat like regenerative braking)
to avoid damage to the motor and mechanical parts When
Figure 11
Clamp lock cross section_
the movement reaches the end ofits travel.
Lock arm
Hydraulic cylinder
Drivellock slide
20
tips.
quite
from

IRSE News
Issue 285
February 2022
Figure 12
Ahigh speed turnout on the Paris to Strasbourg High Speed Line
Photo SNCE
Facing point lock tolerances
Stillto come
Although it is desirable from
 safety perspective for the gap
In this article we have explored the basics of points and point
between the closed switch railand the stock rail to be as small
operation, and the role of signalling and the signal engineerin
as possible (ideally zero), in practice some tolerance must be
ensuring
Work
safely. Next month, in Part 2, we Will look
applied. Without this, the
slightest movement or incorrect
at some ofthe additional features and functions associated
adjustment of the points might mean the point lock could
with points, including topics such as trailable points, catch
not physically engage. If that were to happen, the detection
points, turnouts on high-speed railways, and more。
circuits would indicate that the points were not locked,and
therefore trains could not be signalled over them. This is a
classic example ofa
points failure, causing delays to trains
and requiring a technician to attend the points。
The provision
Things to think about
ofthe tolerance is, therefore
a trade-off between safety
You may like to consider the following questions; answers
and reliability。
Will follow in the March issue of IRSE News。
Accordingly, points are adjusted so that With
a Very small gap
Mechanical point rodding (see Figure 6) expands and
between the switch and stock rail (typically ISmm on standard
contracts in length with the air temperature. This
gauge railways) the lock can still engage. If the gap is much
could cause points to unlock or move When
larger (typically 3.Smm) the lock must fail to engage. The
should not
How is this prevented from happening?
normal way of checking these gaps is to use
facing point
2_
Stretcher bars, switch rails and the common crossing
lock gauge. This is nothing more than a small rectangular
provide an electrical connection between the stock
piece of metal 1.Smm thick at one end and 3.Smm thickat
rails, which would mean that a track circuit through
the other. Each end is in turn inserted between the stock
the
points would show permanently occupied. How is
and switch rails, and the points moved (generally
hand
this problem overcome?
operation rather than under power) to check that at 1.5 mm
the lock engages and that at 3.5mm it does not
The tolerances
3_
In What circumstances might points be provided for
may vary slightly for different railways and countries, but the
the purposes of
derailing
train?
principles are the same
Do we hold the correct email address for
Ifyou have just joined the
Please don't keep
digital community or recently changed your email address you Will not be
receiving important membership information or IRSE e-communications
us in the Qark!!
Don't miss out. Please email your new contact details to
membership@irse:org to enable us to update our database
21
they
Very
they
Dy
yoU?

I RSE /
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Back to basics: Points
Part tUO
Francis How
This is the second part of the latest in the IRSE's
Back
Other features of point operating include:
to basics" series of articles, aimed particularly at helping
are often
required to be AC immune, to avoid the
people preparing to take the Certificate in Railway
possibility of electromagnetic induction causing the motor
Control Engienering Fundamentals (Module A) of the
to turn (even slightly) in AC electrified areas。
IRSE's Exam, and those who are new to the industry or
They usually have some sort of clutch or cut-out so that
the profession of railway signalling and telecoms。
in the event of the mechanism being unable to complete
the point movement
due to obstruction), the
In part one (see IRSE News February 2022) we looked
mechanism and the power supply do not suffer damage by
at the fundamentals of points and point operation
continuing to operate
including how points are moved, detected and
The design of the clutch or cut-out, and of the internal
locked.In this second part we will explore some of
Circuits ofthe operating mechanism,are such that if the
the additional features and functions associated with
points are prevented from completing their movement; the
points. These are not universal, and the details vary, so
signaller can call the points back to their original position。
i is worthwhile investigating Whether and how
are
Moving power-operated points under failure
applied on railways With which you are familiar。
conditions
Electrical power fov moving points
There must be a means of operating points manually if it is
point operating mechanisms use relatively low voltages,
not possible to move them under power. Point operating
typically 120V, although voltages as low as 24V may also
mechanisms are therefore designed so that
can be
be encountered. Usually these are DC machines, although
operated using
rotary handle or a lever to emulate the
some use AC, particularly in DC traction areas for immunity
operation of the electric motor (albeit slowly), orin the case
purposes. They may have a peak current requirement of
of hydraulically operated mechanisms, to pump the hydraulic
as muchas 12A When the points begin to move and at the
fluid.In some cases the lever is permanently attached to the
completion of the movement. Where points are powered
point operating mechanism and padlocked to prevent misuse
directly from the interlocking, the high current requirement
see Figure 1.In other cases the handle is inserted into the
constrains the maximum distance to the points, dependent
machine, which disconnects the electrical supply So that
upon the size of cable used, to avoid excessive voltage drop:
power operation cannot inadvertently re-start (which, apart
To overcome this limitation, points may alternatively obtain
from anything else; could cause injury to the operator) The
their power from
a local trackside source; with low power relay
handle is kept securely in a trackside cabinet or off-site; to
Or solid-state control circuits connecting the interlocking to
avoid the risk ofan unauthorised person attempting to operate
the power source, to switch the power on and off as
required.
the machine with potentially catastrophic results。
Sometimes the power is derived from the traction supply,
Which can be problematic if the voltage fluctuates depending
Time of operation
upon the presence orabsence of trains in the
vicinity。
The faster that points can be moved, the more quickly a route
can be set,and on
railways this can have a measurable
In some countries, higher voltages (up to 40OVAC, sometimes
impact on capacity. Time of operation of points is therefore a
three-phase) are used to power the operating mechanisms;
factor for consideration. Typically, a point machine can move
Which enable the points to be powered directly from the
a Set of
points in ~3-5 seconds, although mechanisms on long
interlocking at much greater distances。
turnouts may take longer. Some operate more quickly
not much more than 1-2 seconds. Of course; there are other
11
BACK
TO
BASICS
They
(e.9.'
they
Many
they
busy

IRSE News
Issue 286
March 2022
Figure 1
A point machine with integral
levers for manual operation and for switching
between auto and manual:
Photo Francis How。
timing factors that need to be considered in determining
have passed over; the mechanism Will return the points to their
the total time of operation, including the time that elapses
natural position. This arrangement can, for example; be useful
between the signaller initiating the setting of a route over a set
on simple passing loops on single lines where it saves the
of points and the point operating mechanism being powered
cost of providing point operating mechanisms_
The downside
by the interlocking.
is that speed restrictions must be applied over the points to
minimise the risk of derailment (as wellas reducing wearand
Trailable points
tear), Which is particularly important when making facing
Whilst the locking of points is without doubt an important
movements because there is no Facing Point Lock (FPL).
safety feature, it does have a drawback. If a train passes
Finally, we should note that hand-operated points; which are
through the points in the trailing direction without authority,
used in sidings and are operated by a lever adjacent to the
with the points set and locked in the opposite position, it is
points, are often also trailable in the sense that a train can
almost inevitable that the operating mechanism and rods
legitimately move over them in the trailing direction and they
Will be damaged,and quite possibly the rails as Well. This is
move to allow the Wheel flanges through. Hand operated
Knownas a
'run-through"_
In extreme situations the locking
points are also used on lower densitylrural railways in some
mechanism may be so effective that the wheel flanges
countries where it is not economic to provide power-operated
on the closed side are forced upand over the switch rail
points. In these cases, the points are often locked to prevent
derailing the train
misuse and are non-trailable_
To deal with this situation, on some railways the points and
their operating mechanisms are designed to be trailable. Ifa
Supplementary operating mechanisms
run-through occurs, the sideways pressure of the wheels on
So far We have implicitly assumed that if the operating
the inside of the open switch rail causes the points to unlock
mechanism moves the switch tips to the correct position,
and the closed switch railis thereby released so that it can
all the rest ofeach switch rail Will move as well, maintaining
open sufficiently for the Wheel flanges to pass through. For
the correct track gauge throughout the points for the route
this to happen, each switch blade is separately driven from
set_
This however is not necessarily the case, as the length
the operating mechanism and there are no stretcher bars
and weight of the switch rail is considerable. The rail weight
(and sometimes no point lock). Trailable points may also be
is typically GOkg/m and the longest points, found on high-
'resettable' , meaning they can be restored to normal operation
speed lines (where the diverging route speed may by 2oOkm/h
after a run-through without attendance on-site;
Or'non-
or more), may be I5Om or more in length from switch tip
resettable' meaning that on-site intervention is required.
to common crossing
although of course the switch rails
themselves are shorter than this_
Trailable points are also provided on some tram networks
and other low-speed railways, not to cater for run-throughs
It is usual therefore
even on points with relatively low
but for legitimate operating movements-
These points are
diverging route speeds, to fit one or more
'back-drives" (also
"passive
there is no operating mechanism or lock,and
known as supplementary drives). Most commonly these take
are
spring-loaded or fitted with
a non-
powered hydraulic
the form ofan assembly of cranks and rodding Which connect
piston so that in the absence ofa train
always lie in one
the switch tips to
position further along the length of the
position (normal or reverse, as required for the situation). If a
switch
see Figure 2. When the point operating mechanism
train passes over the
points in the trailing direction Which is
moves the switch tips, the motion is transmitted via the cranks
opposite to the natural lie of the points, the Wheel flanges Will
and rodding so that the Whole length of the switch rail moves
push the switches to the required position. After all the Wheels
in unison. The cranks and
rodding must be adjusted correctly,
because of course the amount of lateral motion required
12
they
they

IRSE News
Issue 286
March 2022
Figure 2
A set of points fitted with a back-drive on the left-hand
Figure 4
Multiple operating mechanisms in use on a high-speed
side. The bracket connected to the sleeper at the intermediate
turnout. In this example there is just one machine driving the points
stretcher bar position supports the rodding run by Way of a rodding
(to the left of the switch tips), and the power from it is transmitted
roller wheel。
hydraulically to several setting and locking mechanisms along the
Photo John Alexander
length of the switch rails_
Photo Francis How。
Figure 3
A set of points with a back-drive and supplementary detector. Sometimes the back-
drive is located between the switch rails
Note that this drawing is intentionally not to scale, in
order to illustrate the back-drive and connector more clearly.
Diagram Andy Knight。
Point machine
Supplementary
Additional
detector
detection rods
Adjustable
Crank
Back drive
part-way down the length of the switch is less than at the
On long turnouts
single point operating mechanism may
Sometimes a supplementary detector is fitted further along the
not have sufficient power to move the whole switch or,even
switch rails to check that the rails are in the correct position
ifit does, the switches may bend along their length rather
the contacts of which form part of the detection circuit
than
move to the required position. To overcome these
see Figure 3。
problems, supplementary point operating mechanisms
(also known as auxiliary actuators) are located part-way
Back drives composed of rodding and cranks are still
along the switch rail
See
Figure 4_
These are controlled
commonplace although they can be difficult to maintain。
from the interlocking and move at the same time as the
Alternatives introduced include a torsion bar mounted along
operating mechanism at the switch tips. In some cases these
the track and supplementary hydraulic rams。
supplementary mechanisms may include a lock to help hold
the switch rails in position throughout their length。
13
tips。
fully

IRSE News
Issue 286
March 2022
Figure 5
The common crossing
(frog) of a set of points, showing the
Wing rails
component parts_
Nose
Flangeway
Figure 6
A swing nose crossing
Photo WikimedialDzelzcelnieks
CC-SA4 licence_
Long turnouts are also usually equipped with supplementary
Swing nose crossings are sometimes also used on turnouts
detection, which may be integral with the supplementary
that are not particularly long but where the axle loads are
operating mechanisms where provided_
The electrical contacts
heavy, to minimise damage and noise.
forthese supplementary detectors form part of the overall
points detection so far as the interlocking is concerned.
Other switchand crossing layouts
However, sometimes the status ofeach detector is separately
So far We have considered points Which permit a train in
indicated (either locally on site or back at the interlocking) to
the facing direction to take one of two routes_
These can,
make it easier when fault-finding.
ofcourse, be used in combination to create more complex
junctions,
simple example being a linking track (crossover)
Swing nose crossings
between tWo parallel lines
But sometimes there is insufficient
The greater the length of a set of points, the smaller the angle
space to accommodate the points required forall the
between the rails Where they meet at the common crossing
movements that the operators require. Most commonly this
and the longer the gap over which the wheels pass without
OCCUrs in the
vicinity of large stations, including specifically
having a rail to
guide or support them
see Figure 5.
terminal stations.In such circumstances various options are
available to the track engineer;
including:
On very long points this gap would become unacceptably
large, and the frog would be too slender to support the wheels
Fixed diamond crossings
Which have no moving parts。
This clearly has safety implications. To overcome this problem,
Switch diamonds
sometimes known as movable elbows_
swing nose
is Used
These are functionally equivalent to
fixed diamond
In
swing nose crossing, the crossing nose (labelled in
crossover but have moving parts
Figure 5) moves sideways to close the gap for Whichever route
Slip switches
sometimes known as double switches
is set. It has its own operating mechanism to do this, working
puzzle switches or compound switches。
in
synchronism with the other operating mechanism(s) under
Examples of these are shown in Figures 7,
8and 9. Other
point
the control of the interlocking
Detection of the position of the
configurations can be found in various parts ofthe world,
nose forms part of the overall points detection circuit。
swing
including Y-shaped junctions where both routes are curved,
DOSe
crossing is shownin Figure 6.
and three-way junctions where there are three routes in the
facing direction。
14
Flangeway
Throat

IRSE News
Issue 286
March 2022
From top:
Figure 7 - A fixed diamond crossing.
Atrain on either track can only go straight
on, not diverge。
Photo Network Rail。
Figure 8
A switch diamond crossing. A
train on either track can only 9o straight on
not diverge
The crossing is fitted with two
pairs of switch rails, back-to-back, Which
are moved in synchronism to provide a
continuous rail head for the train movement
Photo WikimedialFalkz; CC-SA4 licence:
Figure 9
A double slip crossover; where
a train approaching from any direction can
either go straight on or take the diverging
route_
There
eight movable switch rails
in this layout, all of which must be moved,
detected and locked.
Photo Shutterstock/Leonid Andronov。
55
15
are

IRSE News
Issue 286
March 2022
Track circuit insulation in points
Or, potentially,
move them slightly without any action by the
One of the difficulties associated with equipment such as
signaller! To overcome this problem, an arrangement of cranks
point rods, soleplates and stretcher bars is that they providean
called a
compensator" is fitted at intervals in the rodding run,
electrical
between the rails, so that a track circuit through
which adjusts as the rodding varies in length so as to prevent
the points would show permanently occupied. To address this
the
points becoming inoperable。
problem all these components are designed with insulators. An
Points for avoiding collisions
alternative, Of course, is to use axle counters, although yoU Will
find that most points are provided with insulators as standard,
Throughout this article we have emphasised the need for
safety, primarily to avoid derailments on points. So it may
regardless of the means of train detection。
seem strange that the very last types of points to mention
The effects of temperature on points
are ones Which are intended to derail or sidetrack trains and
Variations in weather, and in particular temperature
can have a
Vehicles! These are known as
points and catch points
significant impact on points, in various Ways. Firstly, changes in
although you may hear them referred to as run-off points and
temperatures can cause the switch rails to vary in length.In the
derailers
Naming conventions vary across different railway
UK, forinstance; it is not uncommon to have 10-15 degrees
administrations, and the phrases trap points and catch points
Celsius change in air temperature during the course of a day,
are often used interchangeably, although historically there
is a difference_
plus another
'20 degrees variation in the rail temperature
caused by sunlight on the rails。
effect is to move the
points are typically provided at the exits of sidings
tapered end ofthe switch rails forward and back by
10-
and passing loops, Where the track joins a main line
See
I5mm, with the additional complication of seasonal changes
Figure 10. Unless
a route is set fora train into or out ofthe
shifting the mean_
Other countries are likely to experience
siding or loop, the trap points are set so that if a train or vehicle
even greater variations
The changing length of the switch rails
inadvertently passes the trap points, it is likely to quickly and
can cause difficulties in maintaining the correct adjustment of
safely come to
a stand, rather than passing onto the main
the locking and detection mechanisms。
line Where
a collision could ocCUr with another train. The
A second problem is snow, which can cause an obstruction
trap points are usually operated in synchronism with the
between the stock and switch rails, preventing the points
corresponding points in the main line_
from fully moving to the required position. Originally the only
Trap points take various forms. In Figure 10, the points have a
solution Was to send people out to clear the snow. Later, gas-
short length of track beyond them to guide the overrunning
powered switch heaters were fitted to the outsides of the stock
Vehicles away from the main line (these are called 'safety
rails to melt the snow_
Nowadays most switch heaters are
points' in some countries). Sometimes
a sand-drag or buffer
electrically powered。
stop is provided to bring vehicles to a halt as soon as possible
Another temperature-related problem affects the rodding that
Careful site-specific consideration is needed at the design
is used to move manually operated points (see Part One of
stage; involving both signal and track engineers, as wellas
this article in the February 2022 edition of IRSE News,and in
operators; to ensure that the train Will stop without causing too
particular Figures 5and 6). Thermal expansion and contraction
much damage_
At Coton (UK)in 1946 (see irse.infol3Gtor) a
of the rodding can make it impossible to move the points
heavily loaded freight train ran out of controlonan incline and
Was derailed on
a set of trap points, completely
demolishing
signal box that was located beyond the points. The destruction
Figure 10
points at the end of a siding or loop
ofthe signal box caused another set of points to move, which
joining a main line
Photo WikimedialFalk2; CC-SA4 licence:
sent 24 ofthe wagons into
siding Where
Collided with a
locomotive. It might sound like a comedy of errors, but sadly
the signalman on duty was killed_
In the example of Figure 10, the function of the trap points is
not to derailan
overrunning train but to bring it to
a standon
the rails_
Where trap points are provided, this is the desirable
option. Other types oftrap point are also used, fitted with
either one or two switch rails but no common crossing:
These
are intended to cause derailment
See
Figure 11. Again,the
aim is to stop the train or vehicle as quickly as possible; clear
ofthe
running lines and the conflict point ahead. Occasionally;
wide-to-gauge trap points are provided , where it would be
unsafe to derail the train either to the left or the right.
However, this is a non-preferred way of stopping an over-
running train as a derailment
even at slow speed, is Very
disruptive (see irse.info/tqlr8 for
a YouTube video showing
this at Quorn on the Great Central Railway, a
heritage
railway in Britain).
The signal engineer refers to the use of points to prevent
collisions when
train passes a signalat danger as "trapping
protection". Trap points are an example of providing points
specifically for this purpose but
where possible; points
provided for other purposes (for example; as a crossover
between two lines) are set by the interlocking to provide
16
path
trap
The
Trap
Trap
line
they

IRSE News
Issue 286
March 2022
Figure 11 - An example of a catch point that derails trains_
Photo Network Rail。
trapping protection so that an overrunning train passes onto
Closing thoughts
a section of line that is hopefully clear of other trains, rather
In these two articles we have explored the basics of points
than into the
ofanothertrain_
This interlocking feature is
and point operation, and the role of signalling and the signal
commonly known as flank protection.
engineer in ensuring
Work
safely. More varieties of points
When used in dark territory (railway lines not controlled by
exist than We have covered, not only for main line and metro
signals but using train orders or track warrants to authorise
railways, but also for rural and low density railways; tram
movements) , trap points are usually locally operated by
railways, rack railways, dual gauge railways and more. But the
hand with suitable
locking arrangements to prevent misuse_
principles of safe operation are more or less the same_
They may be the responsibility of others rather than the
Ifyou are new to railway signalling we encourage you to ask
signal engineer。
mentor or manager to arrange
a Visit to
a set of points
points are still used at many locations on railways
So that you can see for yourself what you have read about
throughout the world, but catch points are rare on modern
in these articles
But take care and obey all the safety rules
railways_
were provided on steep inclines in the days
points are hazardous, and so are the trains that run over them.
when railway vehicles were unbraked. If a train split in two
In a future article We Will look at the maintenance of points
as it ascended an incline; the back portion would run back
from a signal engineering point of view, including specifically
down the gradient. The function of the catch points Was to
the use of remote condition monitoring:
derail the vehicles as they ran back to avoid the possibility
of them running further downhill and colliding with another
Francis would like to thank the following for their assistance
train. Catch points were generally not worked either by the
with his points back to basics articles. John Alexander;
signalman or the interlocking. As the train ascended the
Allan Neilson, Trevor Bradbeer, Andy Knight; Steve Franklin
gradient it passed over the points in the trailing direction。
and his team at Network Rail, and Brian Counter from the
The switch blades would be moved into the correct position
Permanent Way Institution_
by the Wheels and return to the derail position after the train
had passed. Self-evidently, unworked catch points were only
About the author
installed on uni-directional lines!
Francis How has been a long-time member of the IRSE,
Finally, although outside the scope of this article since
are
not points, it is worth noting that derailers are Widely used in
throughout his distinguished career. First with British Raill
Railtrack, with Atkins, and then as the technical director of
North America and elsewhere as an alternative to trap points_
the Railway Industry Association. He Was
Thorrowgood
They take various forms, usually a bolt-on to the running
scholar (awarded to those Who have excelled in the
rail (there is no movable switch rail). When set to derail the
Institution's exam) and served on IRSE Council for many
mechanism forces the Wheels up and over the running rail
years, and became the president of the Institution in 2012-
thereby derailing the vehicle(s) . Derailers may be operated by
2013. He Was
appointed as the chief executive of the IRSE
a hand lever (often called
switchstand" in North America), or
from 2015 to 2018 and led many of the improvements to
by power,and
may be fitted with locks and detectors for
the Institution. Francis is widely respected in the industry
integration into the signalling system:
for his professionalism and extensive technical knowledge。
17
path
they
YoUr
Trap
They
they
they