13
with contributions from John Alexander and Trevor BradbeerBack to basics: Points
Part one
Francis How
This is the latest in the IRSE’s “Back to basics” series of 
articles, aimed particularly at helping people preparing to take the Certificate in Railway Control Engineering Fundamentals (Module A) of the IRSE’s Exam, and those who are new to the industry or the profession of railway signalling.
This article is about points and is in two parts. Part 2 
will follow in IRSE News March 2022. Points have been mentioned previously in the Back-to-Basics series but have not been covered in any detail until now. There 
are seemingly endless varieties of points and point 
operating mechanisms around the world, and it is not possible to cover them all. Instead, we will focus on the principles and common practices, with some examples. Terminology varies considerably as well; we will use the term ‘points; throughout, but points are also referred to as ‘switches and crossings’ (S&C) and ‘turnouts’. 
One of the joys of S&T engineering is that it embraces a broad 
range of engineering skills. Many articles in IRSE News explore high-tech topics such as software, IP networks, cyber security 
and artificial intelligence. At the other end of the spectrum lies the mechanical engineering of points, with the signal engineer 
quite literally involved in the nuts, bolts and grease of keeping points operational. You can be an S&T engineer at either end 
of this spectrum, or somewhere in the middle – and a few 
even manage to be knowledgeable about all of it!
What are points and why do  
railways need them?
As soon as a railway becomes more than a simple piece of 
track connecting A and B, requiring junctions to connect with other lines or sidings, then points are a necessity. They 
comprise fixed and moveable rails that guide a train from one 
track to another. 
Roads have junctions as well, of course, but self-evidently 
there are no moveable parts, and it is worth briefly considering 
why railways are not the same. Firstly, road vehicles can steer themselves whereas trains cannot, and they therefore require something to guide them in the intended direction. Secondly, the wheels of road vehicles sit on the road surface, with no part of the wheel below surface level. The wheels of railway 
vehicles have flanges, which is the part of the wheel which 
runs on the inside of the tracks and serves, in extremis, to prevent the vehicles derailing – see Figure 1.
For these reasons, points have moveable sections of rail, both 
to provide a continuous railhead for the train to travel in the 
intended direction, and to provide gaps in the rails where required so that the flanges can pass through.
On most railways, the points trackwork is the responsibility 
of the track (permanent way) engineer, and the signal engineer is responsible for providing and controlling (via the signalling system) the means of moving the points, and for ensuring that the points are in the required position 
before a train is permitted to pass over them. This division of 
responsibility is not universally true, however, and in some railway administrations the roles and responsibilities are allocated differently.
Points are used to enable trains to diverge from the ‘straight’ 
route ahead, onto another line, or to stay on the straight route. When trains traverse a set of points in this manner, they are said to be travelling over the points in the ‘facing’ direction. 
Points can also be used in the opposite direction, of course, 
where two lines converge and become one. Trains using points in this manner are said to be travelling over them in the ‘trailing’ direction – see Figure 2. Many points are used for both 
facing and trailing movements.Figure 1 – Profile of wheels on a pair of rails, illustrating the flanges.

 IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
14
The basic design of points
Before going much further, we need to understand the 
principal parts of a set of points. The main components are shown in Figure 3. Again, terminology varies somewhat, both 
from one country to another and depending upon whether 
you are a track engineer or a signal engineer. So please excuse us if we use terminology with which you are not familiar or even which you consider to be incorrect! 
Various terms are also used to describe the position of points. 
In Britain, and in some other countries, when the points are set for straight route they are said to be in the ‘normal’ position, and when they are set for the diverging route, they 
are in the ‘reverse’ position. This terminology dates from the 
days of mechanical lever signal boxes, when a lever was said to be in its normal position when it had not been pulled, and in its reverse position when it had been pulled. Alternative terminologies for normal and reverse, which are used in other 
parts of the world, include left/right, positive/negative and 
direct/diverted.
The key components of the points shown in Figure 3 are:
Switch rails (also known as blades or tongues) are the movable 
rail sections which guide the train along the straight or the diverging route. They are tapered at their tips so as to fit closely to the adjacent stock rail.
Stock rails are the outer running rails for the straight and 
diverging routes. The tips of the switch rails move up tight against the stock rails when in the closed position for route set. Common crossing (also known as a ‘Frog’ or ‘Vee’ crossing) 
is the part of the track layout where the switch rails converge. 
Of necessity, there is a gap in the rails here so that the wheel flanges can pass through. The existence of a gap can however create problems, particularly on long turnouts, and we shall return to this subject in Part 2.
Closure rails are non-moving sections of rail that connect the 
switch rails with the common crossing.
Check rails. Also known as guard rails, these are short sections 
of rail positioned alongside the stock rail to ensure that the wheels follow the correct route through the common crossing 
(frog). It can be seen in Figure 3 that there are similar rails alongside and forming part of the common crossing. These 
are known as wing rails (sometimes these are manufactured as part of the common crossing rather than being separate rails).
Stretcher bars are provided at intervals between the two 
switch rails to help ensure that the correct distance is 
maintained between them not just at the tips but throughout their length. Note that railways in many countries do not use stretcher bars, although they are used in Britain and some other countries whose railways are based on British practice. 
Where they are provided, the number of stretcher bars is 
governed by the length of the switch rails, which in turn is determined by the maximum permitted speed of trains taking the diverging route.
Switch heels are the demarcation point between the movable 
switch rails and the fixed closure rails. A heel block assembly is positioned in the vicinity of each heel to maintain the switch, closure and adjacent stock rail in the correct relative positions.Facing 
Trailing
Switch railsStretcher bars
Stock railClosure rails
Check rail
Wing rails
Check rail
Common crossingStock railStraight route
Diverging route Position of
switch heelsFigure 2 – Facing and trailing directions of movement over a set of points.
Figure 3 – The principal parts of a typical set of points.
 IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
15
All these components work together to guide a train along 
the correct route. Ensuring that a train can traverse points 
safely and smoothly, with minimum wear and tear on both the wheels and the track, means that the design of points is 
a complex matter, particularly where points are very long (for 
high-speed turnouts).
What Figure 3 does not depict, but which can be seen in 
Figure 4, are the supporting elements for the rails. These 
include extra-long sleepers which support the rails. Sleepers are known in some parts of the world as bearers, ties or 
cross -ties. The rails themselves sit on ‘chairs’, as does rail on 
plain line, of course. Where the switch rails move, the chairs support both the stock rail and the switch rail. These are ‘slide chairs’, and as well as holding the stock rail in position 
they also have a flat surface over which the switch rails move 
laterally. To aid movement, these surfaces are usually greased, or fitted with plastic inserts to reduce friction, or with rollers which lift the switch rails very slightly while they move.
Operational hazards associated  
with points
So far, we have not said anything about how points are moved 
and held in position for the passage of a train. This is where the signal engineer comes in! But before we discuss this, we 
should consider the operational hazards associated with a set 
of points. Clearly, a section of rail that can move is potentially disastrous for a train. Before reading further, you might like to think for yourself what the principal hazards are. If not, or to check your answers, they are:
1. Points not fully in correct position for the safe movement of a train. For facing movements, this is likely to result in derailment. For trailing movements derailment is unlikely, 
but damage may occur to the points or associated 
trackside equipment
2.
 Points in the opposite position to tha t required for 
safe movement of a train. For facing movements, this will result in the train going on the wrong route, which may have consequences such as derailment as a result 
of excessive speed, or collision with another train. For 
trailing movements, the train might derail or, more likely, severe damage is caused to the points and the associated trackside equipment. 
3.
 Points moving as a train passes over them . For facing 
moves, this is very likely to result in derailment of all or part of the train. For trailing movements, it could result in 
derailment but is more likely to cause damage to the points 
and associated trackside equipment.
4. Excessive speed. This may result in derailment. Most points have, by their very nature, one position which involves a relatively tight radius curve, corresponding to the diverging 
route. There is generally no super-elevation or ‘cant’ on 
the diverging route through the points to help the train negotiate the curve (unlike plain line curved track).
Figure 4 – General layout of a set of points.
Photo Shutterstock/Timofeev Vladimir.Switch rail
Switch railStock rail
Stock railSlide chairsExtended sleepers  
(bearers)
The mechanics of how a wheel stays on the track are complicated, and are beyond the scope of this article, 
but it is worth noting that in normal running on plain line 
(including curves), the track and the wheels are designed so that ideally the flange does not come into contact with the inside of the rail. Instead, the concave/conical wheel profile 
serves to keep each pair of wheels running smoothly on the 
head (top) of the rail.If you like railway history, you may be interested in exploring how the wheel-rail interface evolved from its origins in the 
earliest horse-drawn wagonways where the wheel surfaces 
were flat and ran in grooved wooden “track”, then later where the guiding flanges formed part of the metal track, rather than being part of the wheels, through to the most 
modern systems which are capable of safely guiding trains 
travelling at very high speeds.Railway wheels and tracksStretcher bar
 IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
16
5. Track gauge is incorrect for safe movement of a train. This 
is likely to result in derailment. The fact that part of the track is moveable means that there is a somewhat greater 
risk (compared with plain line) of the track becoming ‘wide 
to gauge’, because of lateral outward movement of the rails caused by the passage of successive vehicles or trains.
6. Broken and worn rails. This may result in derailment. The switch blades and the common crossing have less metal to support the wheels, and both the switch tips 
and the crossing receive more impact from the wheels, 
which may cause rails to break. Switch and stock rails also wear through use, especially where heavy traffic uses the diverging route. Excessive wear can lead to derailment.
The risks associated with the first three of these hazards are controlled principally through the signalling system, of which 
we shall say more shortly. 
The fourth hazard is usually controlled by a speed restriction 
that applies to trains taking the diverging route, reinforced by controls in the signalling system. These controls may include 
route and/or speed indications and aspect controls that 
instruct/remind the driver to slow down, and train protection systems which enforce speed reduction in the event 
of driver error.
The risks relating to the fifth and sixth hazards are controlled 
principally through track inspection and maintenance.
The role of signalling in point operation
The role of signalling in the operation of points is to fulfil three basic functions, and they are achieved jointly by the interlocking and the trackside equipment, as 
described in Table 1.
The interlocking features relating to points were described 
in two previous ‘Back to basics’ articles (IRSE News, April and 
May 2020), and it is not the intention to repeat them in this 
article. This article focuses instead on the trackside signalling equipment that moves, locks and checks the points.
Point operating mechanisms
Manually operated points
When railways first began, the practice was for railway personnel to operate a set of points using a lever beside the track. Examples of this can still be found in sidings.  When signal boxes began to appear, the points were operated by moving a mechanical lever in the box. Each point lever was connected via rodding (or sometimes wires) and cranks to the tips of the switch rails of the associated set of points – see 
Figures 5 and 6. By pulling the lever to the reverse position in 
the lever frame, the rodding moved in one direction sufficiently to move the points into the reverse position. Restoring the lever to the normal position returned the points to the 
normal position.
Because of the weight and the effort required to move the 
rodding and points via the points lever, the distance from a signal box to a mechanically worked set of points is quite 
limited (typically to ~200-300 metres). 
Power operated points 
Examples of mechanically-worked points can still be found 
in many parts of the world, but all modern signalling systems use power-operated points. Most commonly this takes the 
form of an electric motor in what is known as a point machine 
(also known as a switch machine or switch motor). The point machine is located adjacent to the switch blades and is connected to the tips of the blades either by two rods (one for 
each blade) or by a single rod and a bar which links the two 
tips, ensuring they move in synchronism. The bar is commonly known as a ‘lock stretcher bar’. Figure 7 shows a point machine, with the drive rod connecting the electric motor via gears to the blades. As the motor turns, the rod moves to the 
left or the right, moving the points to the normal or reverse 
position respectively. Note that there are other rods also shown in the diagram – we shall discuss their purpose shortly. 
There are many types of point machine in use, with various 
drive arrangements linking the motor to the switch rails. That shown in Figure 7 is just one example . A layout in a training environment is shown in Figure 8, where the point machine is mounted on extended sleepers, and as with mechanical points 
a soleplate (extended stock rail gauge tie) maintains the gauge 
and the distance between the track and the point machine. 
Over the years, alternative types of powered point operating 
mechanisms have been produced. Some use hydraulic 
actuation, such as the clamp lock (other similar devices are known as chair locks, claw locks and ground locks). The clamp lock has a hydraulic power pack instead of an electric motor, with hydraulic rams (jacks) positioned between the sleepers to 
drive the switch rails to the normal and reverse positions.
Function Fulfilled by
Move the points to the required position for 
the passage of a trainA trackside point operating mechanism which, under the control of the interlocking, moves the switch rails to the required position. The mechanism is usually mechanically, electrically or hydraulically powered, although some 
railways use pneumatic power.
Check that the points are in the correct position.A trackside mechanism which detects whether the switch rails are correctly positioned and locked (see below) for the safe passage of the train. Often, but 
not always an integral part of the point operating mechanism (see earlier).
The detection of the position of the switch rails is used by the interlocking.
Prevent the points moving until the whole of 
the train has passed safelyA locking mechanism which holds the switch rails securely in the required position for the train. Again often, but not always, an integral part of the point 
operating mechanism
In addition, the interlocking has safety features that prevent power being 
transmitted to the point operating mechanism when there is a route set over a 
set of points and when there is a train actually on the points. Table 1 – The main signalling functions associated with a set of points.
 IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
17
Figure 5 – Points rodding leading from the signal box (out of picture, to the 
right) to a set of points, with cranks that are used to transmit the motion of the 
rods through a right-angle.
Photo John Francis.Figure 6 – Close-up of a rodding run for several 
sets of points (a wire run for signals is on the left).Photo Ian J Allison.
Figure 7 – Typical point machine with its connections to the switch rails  
(schematic only; not intended to be an accurate representation).Image Trevor Bradbeer.Point machine
Extended sleepers
Sole plate
Lock stretcher bar
Detector rod 
(right-hand switch)Detector rod 
(left-hand switch)Circuit controller and 
detection contactsFacing point  
lock rodDrive rod
Stretcher bar
 IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
18
A further variant is the ‘in sleeper’ (also known as ‘in bearer’) 
mechanism, where all the machinery is contained within a box or trough which takes the place of a conventional sleeper. This 
means there is little or no equipment above sleeper level, thus 
making it easier to undertake mechanised track maintenance without risk of damage to the equipment.
It is also worth mentioning an example of an innovative 
approach to point operation which has featured in IRSE News (most recently in May 2019). “Repoint” was a project undertaken by the University of Loughborough (UK) to consider afresh the failure modes of points and to develop an 
operating mechanism that was more reliable, just as safe, and 
would help improve track capacity. It illustrates that innovative thinking still has something to contribute to an issue as basic as point operation.
Checking that points are  
correctly positioned
The second signalling function associated with points (listed in 
Table 1) is to detect the position of the points. This is necessary because it cannot be assumed that the points will move to 
the position to which they have been called. Ballast or other 
debris could obstruct the movement, for instance, preventing the switch rail closing against the stock rail. A power failure or malfunction of the point operating mechanism could also 
prevent the movement. 
In the situation where the points do not need to be moved 
for the route being set, it cannot be assumed they are still safely in the correct position for the next train. The passage 
of the previous trains might have caused the points to 
open very slightly, through vibration, wear or mechanical failure for instance.How detection works
The positions of both switch rails are detected, firstly to be sure that the tip of the closed switch rail is sufficiently close to the stock rail that a wheel flange could not pass between the 
two rails; and secondly to be sure that the gap between the 
stock rail and the open switch rail is sufficient for the wheel flanges to pass through.
In the case of point machines, detection is achieved using 
rods that are attached to the tips of the switch blades, which 
operate electrical contacts in a detector box adjacent to the track as the switches move left or right. In many point machines, the electrical contacts are inside the point machine 
rather than being a separate unit – see Figures 7 and 8. These 
are called ‘combined’ point machines. In the case of hydraulic clamp locks, the contacts are in boxes attached to the outsides of the stock rails. 
The electrical contacts for both switch rails are combined into 
points detection circuits, the outputs of which are fed back to the interlocking via fail-safe relay circuits or a high integrity transmission system. Hence the interlocking knows whether 
the points are normal, reverse or in an indeterminate state 
(neither normal nor reverse).
Where points are worked mechanically via rodding, a wholly 
mechanical detection system is often used. The detection 
rods are connected to sliding metal plates which engage with 
similar slotted plates at right angles which are connected to the wires that operate the mechanical signals. This ensures that the wires leading to the signals cannot be operated unless 
the points are correctly set, and vice versa. Hence there is 
direct interlocking of points and signals at the trackside, in addition to the interlocking of the levers in the signal box. You can just about see an example of such a device near the top left of Figure 5.
Figure 8 – A typical point machine arrangement (in a training school environment) showing the drive rod, detection, FPL 
rodding connections, and associated stretcher bars. Image Trevor Bradbeer and Signet Solutions.
 IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
19
Detection tolerances
The permissible gaps between the switch and stock rails vary 
slightly from country to country, but on a standard gauge railway the gap on the closed switch rail side must typically be 
no more than ~5mm, and on the open switch rail side it must 
be at least ~115mm (these figures may also vary depending upon the type of points and operating mechanisms). If these criteria are not satisfied, the detection circuits will indicate to 
the interlocking that the points are not correctly positioned. 
Tolerances are generally assigned to these values, both to allow some latitude when setting up or maintaining the points and to reduce the risk of the closed switch detection being intermittently lost due to track vibration or slight 
movement. Thus, for instance, one railway administration 
states that the closed switch detection contacts must just be made at a switch-stock rail gap of 4mm (but not less) and definitely broken at 6mm.
Detection of the open switch may at first sight appear to 
be less critical than the closed switch, but there have been accidents such as at Kingham (1966) and Grayrigg (2007) , both in Britain, where the open switch rail gap was insufficient. 
The continual battering by the backs of wheels caused the 
open switch rail and fittings to be fatigued, causing fractures leading to derailment. The condition of the stretcher bars was implicated in both accidents, incidentally.
Locking the points in position
The third and final signalling component of points operation is the physical locking of the points in the required position, to minimise the risk of the switch rails moving. The 
locking mechanism is known as a ‘point lock’ or ‘Facing 
Point Lock’ (FPL). 
Why do we lock points?
In Britain it has been, from relatively early railway days, a legal requirement that points used by passenger trains in the facing direction are fitted with a lock. The Board of Trade’s 1892 
requirements relating to the opening of new railways stated 
that “In order to ensure that the points are in their proper position before the signals are lowered, and, to prevent the signalman from shifting them, while a train is passing over 
them, all facing points must be fitted with facing-point locks…”.This leads to two key observations. Firstly, the requirement 
recognised that points traversed in a facing direction present a much greater hazard than in the trailing direction; and secondly, the hazard was originally perceived more in relation to signalman error than the points having an excessive gap 
between the closed switch and stock rail because of poor 
adjustment, track movement or wear and tear. The risk of signaller error in relation to points movement has now all but disappeared as a consequence of comprehensive interlocking 
of points, tracks and signals. However, the requirement to lock 
facing points on passenger lines remains in most countries in the world and serves to minimise the risk of derailment in the vicinity of the blade tips. Furthermore, in practice many railways lock the points for movements in the trailing direction 
as well as facing, and also lock points on freight-only lines.
The extreme dangers associated with facing points can be 
seen throughout the history of railways. As with so many safety 
features on railways, accidents led to the introduction of facing 
point locks. In Britain there was for many years an aversion to having facing points at all, something which reached its height in 1873 when a north-bound express train derailed on points at Wigan station. Thirteen people died as a result of the 
points moving under the train (not, in this case, by the action 
of the signalman but because of the excessive speed of the train). The accident brought to the fore the need to fit locks to facing points. Even in relatively modern times points-related 
accidents have still occurred. Examples include Potters Bar, UK 
(2002), Grayrigg, UK (2007) and South Carolina, USA (2018).
How points are locked
As with detection, the facing point lock mechanism varies in design for mechanically-worked and power-operated points. It is instructive to start by looking at mechanical points – see 
Figure 9. A lock stretcher bar connects the two switch blades. 
It has two slots cut into it. When the points are in the required position, the signaller pulls the FPL lever. This is a separate lever, not the same one as is used to move the points. The 
lever is connected via rodding to the lock rod, driving it into 
one of the two slots in the lock stretcher bar. There is one slot for the points in the normal position, and a second for the reverse position.
Figure 9 –A facing point lock on a set of mechanical points.
Image Trevor Bradbeer.
Rodding coming in  
from FPL lever 
in signal boxPort where lock  
rod engages  
when points are in  
opposite position to  
that shownLock stretcher bar
Lock rod
Sole plate
 IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
20
It can be seen that when the lock is engaged in one of the 
slots, it is impossible for the switch blades to move, either by the signaller attempting to move the points lever or by 
vibration as a train traverses the points. Figure 9 also shows 
the metal soleplate (also known as the stock rail gauge tie) on which the lock and the two slide chairs are rigidly mounted to prevent movement and maintain the correct gauge at 
the switch tips.
Moving on to power-operated points, although some railways 
use point locks which are actuated by a mechanism separate from that which moves the points, more commonly the lock 
is part of the point operating mechanism. In the case of point 
machines, the lock is usually contained within the machine. If you look at Figures 7 and 8 you will see that one of the rods coming out of the point machine is connected to the mid-
point of the lock stretcher bar. Inside the point machine the 
rod is connected to a lock mechanism. As the point machine completes the point movement (either normal or reverse) it engages the lock mechanism, so preventing the rod, lock stretcher bar and switch blades from moving until the point 
machine is powered up again to move the points to the 
other position. In the case of a clamp lock, the locking mechanism is different, although its purpose is the same. Trying to explain how a clamp lock works is not easy – it is easier to understand by 
seeing one in action! In essence, there is a G-shaped lock arm 
(sometimes called a claw) attached by a pivot to the inside of each switch rail. The hydraulic rams move the switch rails via the drive/lock slides and the lock arms, and eventually the 
free end of the lock arm on the closed switch side is forced 
up so that it fits tightly against the outside of the stock rail. The switch and stock rails are thus physically clamped to each other and cannot be moved unless the clamp lock is powered to the opposite position – see Figures 10 and 11.
Some point operating mechanisms have a quite different 
type of lock. For instance, the UK High Performance Switch System (HPSS) utilises a lead screw (which moves the 
blades normal and reverse) combined with a brake, thus 
preventing any movement of the blades when they are in the required position.
In power-operated points, the detection circuits referred 
to earlier also include electrical contacts to prove that the 
lock has engaged. Thus, when the detection circuit informs the interlocking that the points are normal or reverse, this information is, in effect confirming that the closed switch is 
against the stock rail, the other switch is sufficiently open, and 
the switches are locked in position. 
It can be seen from what we have considered so far that 
modern point machines, clamp locks and similar devices 
combine the functions of point movement, detection and 
locking in one trackside device. Taking the example of a conventional point machine, a typical sequence of operations for moving the points from normal to reverse is as follows:
1. Motor starts turning when power ed from the interlocking.
2. Point lock disengages by the action o f the motor. As soon 
as this starts to happen the normal detection circuit is forced to break (even though the switches are still normal at this stage).
3. S witches are driven to the reverse position by the 
action of the motor.
4. Point lock engages by the action o f the motor.
5. Reverse detection cir cuit is energised, provided the lock 
has successfully engaged and both switch rails have fully moved to the reverse position.
6. Power to the motor is switched o ff by contacts on the 
circuit controller inside the point machine (the interlocking also disconnects the power to the points when reverse detection is obtained).
7. The motor is electrically brak ed by ‘snubbing’ contacts on 
the circuit controller (somewhat like regenerative braking), to avoid damage to the motor and mechanical parts when the movement reaches the end of its travel.
Hydraulic cylinderLock arm
Drive/lock slide
Figure 10 – Typical clamp lock installation.  
Photo Francis How.
Figure 11 – Clamp lock cross section.
Do we hold the correct email address for you? If you have just joined the 
digital community or recently changed your email address you will not be receiving important membership information or IRSE e-communications.
Don’t miss out. Please email your new contact details to 
membership@irse.org to enable us to update our database.Please don’t keep 
us in the dark!! IRSE News |  Issue 285  |  February 2022
21
Facing point lock tolerances
Although it is desirable from a safety perspective for the gap between the closed switch rail and the stock rail to be as small as possible (ideally zero), in practice some tolerance must be 
applied. Without this, the very slightest movement or incorrect 
adjustment of the points might mean the point lock could not physically engage. If that were to happen, the detection circuits would indicate that the points were not locked, and 
therefore trains could not be signalled over them. This is a 
classic example of a points failure, causing delays to trains and requiring a technician to attend the points. The provision of the tolerance is, therefore, a trade-off between safety and reliability.
Accordingly, points are adjusted so that with a very small gap 
between the switch and stock rail (typically 1.5mm on standard gauge railways) the lock can still engage. If the gap is much 
larger (typically 3.5mm) the lock must fail to engage. The 
normal way of checking these gaps is to use a facing point lock gauge. This is nothing more than a small rectangular piece of metal, 1.5mm thick at one end and 3.5mm thick at the other. Each end is in turn inserted between the stock 
and switch rails, and the points moved (generally by hand 
operation rather than under power) to check that at 1.5 mm the lock engages and that at 3.5mm it does not. The tolerances may vary slightly for different railways and countries, but the 
principles are the same.
Figure 12 – A high speed turnout on the Paris to Strasbourg High Speed Line.
Photo SNCF.
Still to come…
In this article we have explored the basics of points and point 
operation, and the role of signalling and the signal engineer in ensuring they work safely. Next month, in Part 2, we will look 
at some of the additional features and functions associated 
with points, including topics such as trailable points, catch points, turnouts on high-speed railways, and more.
Things to think about 
You may like to consider the following questions; answers will follow in the March issue of IRSE News.
1. Mechanical point r odding (see Figure 6) expands and 
contracts in length with the air temperature. This could cause points to unlock or move when they should not. How is this prevented from happening?
2. S tretcher bars, switch rails and the common crossing 
provide an electrical connection between the stock rails, which would mean that a track circuit through the points would show permanently occupied. How is 
this problem overcome?
3. In wha t circumstances might points be provided for 
the purposes of derailing a train?
11
Back to basics: Points 
Part two
Francis How
This is the second part of the latest in the IRSE’s “Back to basics” series of articles, aimed particularly at helping people preparing to take the Certificate in Railway Control Engienering Fundamentals (Module A) of the IRSE’s Exam, and those who are new to the industry or the profession of railway signalling and telecoms.
In part one (see IRSE News February 2022) we looked 
at the fundamentals of points and point operation, including how points are moved, detected and locked. In this second part we will explore some of the additional features and functions associated with points. These are not universal, and the details vary, so it is worthwhile investigating whether and how they are applied on railways with which you are familiar.
Electrical power for moving points
Many point operating mechanisms use relatively low voltages, 
typically 120V, although voltages as low as 24V may also be encountered. Usually these are DC machines, although 
some use AC, particularly in DC traction areas for immunity 
purposes. They may have a peak current requirement of as much as 12A when the points begin to move and at the completion of the movement. Where points are powered 
directly from the interlocking, the high current requirement 
constrains the maximum distance to the points, dependent upon the size of cable used, to avoid excessive voltage drop. To overcome this limitation, points may alternatively obtain their power from a local trackside source, with low power relay 
or solid-state control circuits connecting the interlocking to 
the power source, to switch the power on and off as required. Sometimes the power is derived from the traction supply, which can be problematic if the voltage fluctuates depending 
upon the presence or absence of trains in the vicinity.
In some countries, higher voltages (up to 400V AC, sometimes 
three-phase) are used to power the operating mechanisms, which enable the points to be powered directly from the 
interlocking at much greater distances.
Other features of point operating include:
• They are often required to be AC immune, to avoid the 
possibility of electromagnetic induction causing the motor to turn (even slightly) in AC electrified areas.
• They usually have some sort of clutch or cut-out so that in the event of the mechanism being unable to complete the point movement (e.g., due to obstruction), the 
mechanism and the power supply do not suffer damage by 
continuing to operate. 
• The design of the clutch or cut-out, and of the internal circuits of the operating mechanism, are such that if the points are prevented from completing their movement, the 
signaller can call the points back to their original position.
Moving power-operated points under failure 
conditions
There must be a means of operating points manually if it is 
not possible to move them under power. Point operating mechanisms are therefore designed so that they can be 
operated using a rotary handle or a lever to emulate the 
operation of the electric motor (albeit slowly), or in the case of hydraulically operated mechanisms, to pump the hydraulic fluid. In some cases the lever is permanently attached to the 
point operating mechanism and padlocked to prevent misuse 
– see Figure 1. In other cases the handle is inserted into the machine, which disconnects the electrical supply so that power operation cannot inadvertently re-start (which, apart from anything else, could cause injury to the operator). The 
handle is kept securely in a trackside cabinet or off-site, to 
avoid the risk of an unauthorised person attempting to operate the machine with potentially catastrophic results.
Time of operation
The faster that points can be moved, the more quickly a route can be set, and on busy railways this can have a measurable impact on capacity. Time of operation of points is therefore a 
factor for consideration. Typically, a point machine can move 
a set of points in ~3-5 seconds, although mechanisms on long turnouts may take longer. Some operate more quickly –  not much more than 1-2 seconds. Of course, there are other 
 IRSE News |  Issue 286  |  March 2022
12
timing factors that need to be considered in determining 
the total time of operation, including the time that elapses between the signaller initiating the setting of a route over a set 
of points and the point operating mechanism being powered 
by the interlocking. 
Trailable points
Whilst the locking of points is without doubt an important safety feature, it does have a drawback. If a train passes through the points in the trailing direction without authority, 
with the points set and locked in the opposite position, it is 
almost inevitable that the operating mechanism and rods will be damaged, and quite possibly the rails as well. This is known as a “run-through”. In extreme situations the locking 
mechanism may be so effective that the wheel flanges 
on the closed side are forced up and over the switch rail, derailing the train.
To deal with this situation, on some railways the points and 
their operating mechanisms are designed to be trailable. If a 
run-through occurs, the sideways pressure of the wheels on the inside of the open switch rail causes the points to unlock, and the closed switch rail is thereby released so that it can 
open sufficiently for the wheel flanges to pass through. For 
this to happen, each switch blade is separately driven from the operating mechanism and there are no stretcher bars (and sometimes no point lock). Trailable points may also be ‘resettable’, meaning they can be restored to normal operation 
after a run-through without attendance on-site, or ‘non-
resettable’ meaning that on-site intervention is required.
Trailable points are also provided on some tram networks 
and other low-speed railways, not to cater for run-throughs 
but for legitimate operating movements. These points are “passive” – there is no operating mechanism or lock, and they are spring-loaded or fitted with a non-powered hydraulic piston so that in the absence of a train they always lie in one 
position (normal or reverse, as required for the situation). If a 
train passes over the points in the trailing direction which is opposite to the natural lie of the points, the wheel flanges will push the switches to the required position. After all the wheels have passed over, the mechanism will return the points to their 
natural position. This arrangement can, for example, be useful 
on simple passing loops on single lines where it saves the cost of providing point operating mechanisms. The downside is that speed restrictions must be applied over the points to 
minimise the risk of derailment (as well as reducing wear and 
tear), which is particularly important when making facing movements because there is no Facing Point Lock (FPL).
Finally, we should note that hand-operated points, which are 
used in sidings and are operated by a lever adjacent to the 
points, are often also trailable in the sense that a train can legitimately move over them in the trailing direction and they move to allow the wheel flanges through. Hand operated points are also used on lower density/rural railways in some 
countries where it is not economic to provide power-operated 
points. In these cases, the points are often locked to prevent misuse and are non-trailable.
Supplementary operating mechanisms
So far we have implicitly assumed that if the operating mechanism moves the switch tips to the correct position, all the rest of each switch rail will move as well, maintaining 
the correct track gauge throughout the points for the route 
set. This however is not necessarily the case, as the length and weight of the switch rail is considerable. The rail weight is typically 60kg/m and the longest points, found on high-
speed lines (where the diverging route speed may by 200km/h 
or more), may be 150m or more in length from switch tip to common crossing – although of course the switch rails themselves are shorter than this.
It is usual therefore, even on points with relatively low 
diverging route speeds, to fit one or more “back-drives” (also known as supplementary drives). Most commonly these take the form of an assembly of cranks and rodding which connect the switch tips to a position further along the length of the 
switch – see Figure 2. When the point operating mechanism 
moves the switch tips, the motion is transmitted via the cranks and rodding so that the whole length of the switch rail moves in unison. The cranks and rodding must be adjusted correctly, 
because of course the amount of lateral motion required 
Figure 1 – A point machine with integral 
levers for manual operation and for switching 
between auto and manual.Photo Francis How.
 IRSE News |  Issue 286  |  March 2022
13
Supplementary
detectorSupplementary
detectorPoint machine
Adjustable
crankAdjustable
crank
Back driveBack driveAdditional 
detection rodsAdditional 
detection rodsFigure 2 – A set of points fitted with a back-drive on the left-hand 
side. The bracket connected to the sleeper at the intermediate stretcher bar position supports the rodding run by way of a rodding roller wheel. 
Photo John Alexander.
Figure 4 – Multiple operating mechanisms in use on a high-speed 
turnout. In this example there is just one machine driving the points 
(to the left of the switch tips), and the power from it is transmitted hydraulically to several setting and locking mechanisms along the 
length of the switch rails. 
Photo Francis How.
part-way down the length of the switch is less than at the tips. 
Sometimes a supplementary detector is fitted further along the switch rails to check that the rails are in the correct position, 
the contacts of which form part of the detection circuit 
– see Figure 3.
Back drives composed of rodding and cranks are still 
commonplace although they can be difficult to maintain. 
Alternatives introduced include a torsion bar mounted along the track and supplementary hydraulic rams.On long turnouts a single point operating mechanism may not have sufficient power to move the whole switch or, even if it does, the switches may bend along their length rather 
than fully move to the required position. To overcome these 
problems, supplementary point operating mechanisms (also known as auxiliary actuators) are located part-way along the switch rail – see Figure 4. These are controlled 
from the interlocking and move at the same time as the 
operating mechanism at the switch tips. In some cases these supplementary mechanisms may include a lock to help hold the switch rails in position throughout their length.Figure 3 – A set of points with a back-drive and supplementary detector. Sometimes the back-
drive is located between the switch rails. Note that this drawing is intentionally not to scale, in order to illustrate the back-drive and connector more clearly.Diagram Andy Knight.
 IRSE News |  Issue 286  |  March 2022
14
Long turnouts are also usually equipped with supplementary 
detection, which may be integral with the supplementary operating mechanisms where provided. The electrical contacts 
for these supplementary detectors form part of the overall 
points detection so far as the interlocking is concerned. However, sometimes the status of each detector is separately indicated (either locally on site or back at the interlocking) to 
make it easier when fault-finding.
Swing nose crossings
The greater the length of a set of points, the smaller the angle 
between the rails where they meet at the common crossing and the longer the gap over which the wheels pass without 
having a rail to guide or support them – see Figure 5.
On very long points this gap would become unacceptably 
large, and the frog would be too slender to support the wheels. 
This clearly has safety implications. To overcome this problem, 
a “swing nose” is used. 
In a swing nose crossing, the crossing nose (labelled in 
Figure 5) moves sideways to close the gap for whichever route 
is set. It has its own operating mechanism to do this, working 
in synchronism with the other operating mechanism(s) under 
the control of the interlocking. Detection of the position of the 
nose forms part of the overall points detection circuit. A swing nose crossing is shown in Figure 6.
ThroatFlangewayFlangewayNoseWing railsFigure 5 – The common crossing 
(frog) of a set of points, showing the 
component parts. 
Figure 6 – A swing nose crossing.
Photo Wikimedia/Dzelzceļnieks, CC-SA4 licence. 
Swing nose crossings are sometimes also used on turnouts 
that are not particularly long but where the axle loads are heavy, to minimise damage and noise.
Other switch and crossing layouts
So far we have considered points which permit a train in 
the facing direction to take one of two routes. These can, 
of course, be used in combination to create more complex 
junctions, a simple example being a linking track (crossover) between two parallel lines. But sometimes there is insufficient 
space to accommodate the points required for all the movements that the operators require. Most commonly this 
occurs in the vicinity of large stations, including specifically 
terminal stations. In such circumstances various options are available to the track engineer, including:
• Fixed diamond crossings – which have no moving parts.
• Switch diamonds – sometimes known as movable elbows. These are functionally equivalent to a fixed diamond crossover but have moving parts.
• Slip switches – sometimes known as double switches, puzzle switches or compound switches.
Examples of these are shown in Figures 7, 8 and 9. Other point configurations can be found in various parts of the world, including Y-shaped junctions where both routes are curved, 
and three-way junctions where there are three routes in the 
facing direction.
 IRSE News |  Issue 286  |  March 2022
15
From top:
Figure 7 – A fixed diamond crossing.  
A train on either track can only go straight 
on, not diverge. 
Photo Network Rail.
Figure 8 – A switch diamond crossing. A 
train on either track can only go straight on, 
not diverge. The crossing is fitted with two 
pairs of switch rails, back-to-back, which 
are moved in synchronism to provide a continuous rail head for the train movement.
Photo Wikimedia/Falk2, CC-SA4 licence.
Figure 9 – A double slip crossover, where 
a train approaching from any direction can either go straight on or take the diverging 
route. There are eight movable switch rails 
in this layout, all of which must be moved, 
detected and locked.
Photo Shutterstock/Leonid Andronov.
 IRSE News |  Issue 286  |  March 2022
16
Track circuit insulation in points
One of the difficulties associated with equipment such as 
point rods, soleplates and stretcher bars is that they provide an electrical path between the rails, so that a track circuit through 
the points would show permanently occupied. To address this 
problem all these components are designed with insulators. An alternative, of course, is to use axle counters, although you will find that most points are provided with insulators as standard, 
regardless of the means of train detection. 
The effects of temperature on points
Variations in weather, and in particular temperature, can have a 
significant impact on points, in various ways. Firstly, changes in temperatures can cause the switch rails to vary in length. In the 
UK, for instance, it is not uncommon to have 10-15 degrees 
Celsius change in air temperature during the course of a day, plus another ~20 degrees variation in the rail temperature caused by sunlight on the rails. The effect is to move the 
tapered end of the switch rails forward and back by ~10-
15mm, with the additional complication of seasonal changes shifting the mean. Other countries are likely to experience even greater variations. The changing length of the switch rails can cause difficulties in maintaining the correct adjustment of 
the locking and detection mechanisms.
A second problem is snow, which can cause an obstruction 
between the stock and switch rails, preventing the points 
from fully moving to the required position. Originally the only 
solution was to send people out to clear the snow. Later, gas-powered switch heaters were fitted to the outsides of the stock rails to melt the snow. Nowadays most switch heaters are electrically powered.
Another temperature-related problem affects the rodding that 
is used to move manually operated points (see Part One of this article in the February 2022 edition of IRSE News, and in 
particular Figures 5 and 6). Thermal expansion and contraction 
of the rodding can make it impossible to move the points or, potentially, move them slightly without any action by the signaller! To overcome this problem, an arrangement of cranks 
called a “compensator” is fitted at intervals in the rodding run, 
which adjusts as the rodding varies in length so as to prevent the points becoming inoperable. 
Points for avoiding collisions
Throughout this article we have emphasised the need for safety, primarily to avoid derailments on points. So it may seem strange that the very last types of points to mention 
are ones which are intended to derail or sidetrack trains and 
vehicles! These are known as trap points and catch points, although you may hear them referred to as run-off points and derailers. Naming conventions vary across different railway 
administrations, and the phrases trap points and catch points 
are often used interchangeably, although historically there is a difference. 
Trap points are typically provided at the exits of sidings 
and passing loops, where the track joins a main line – see 
Figure 10. Unless a route is set for a train into or out of the siding or loop, the trap points are set so that if a train or vehicle inadvertently passes the trap points, it is likely to quickly and 
safely come to a stand, rather than passing onto the main 
line where a collision could occur with another train. The trap points are usually operated in synchronism with the corresponding points in the main line.
Trap points take various forms. In Figure 10, the points have a 
short length of track beyond them to guide the overrunning vehicles away from the main line (these are called ‘safety points’ in some countries). Sometimes a sand-drag or buffer 
stop is provided to bring vehicles to a halt as soon as possible. 
Careful site-specific consideration is needed at the design stage, involving both signal and track engineers, as well as operators, to ensure that the train will stop without causing too much damage. At Coton (UK) in 1946 (see irse.info/36tor) a 
heavily loaded freight train ran out of control on an incline and 
was derailed on a set of trap points, completely demolishing a signal box that was located beyond the points. The destruction of the signal box caused another set of points to move, which 
sent 24 of the wagons into a siding where they collided with a 
locomotive. It might sound like a comedy of errors, but sadly the signalman on duty was killed.
In the example of Figure 10, the function of the trap points is 
not to derail an overrunning train but to bring it to a stand on 
the rails. Where trap points are provided, this is the desirable option. Other types of trap point are also used, fitted with either one or two switch rails but no common crossing. These 
are intended to cause derailment – see Figure 11. Again, the 
aim is to stop the train or vehicle as quickly as possible, clear of the running lines and the conflict point ahead. Occasionally, wide-to-gauge trap points are provided, where it would be unsafe to derail the train either to the left or the right.
However, this is a non-preferred way of stopping an over-
running train as a derailment, even at slow speed, is very disruptive (see irse.info/tqlr8 for a YouTube video showing 
this at Quorn on the Great Central Railway, a heritage 
railway in Britain).
The signal engineer refers to the use of points to prevent 
collisions when a train passes a signal at danger as “trapping 
protection”. Trap points are an example of providing points 
specifically for this purpose but, where possible, points provided for other purposes (for example, as a crossover between two lines) are set by the interlocking to provide 
Figure 10 – Trap points at the end of a siding or loop  
line joining a main line. 
Photo Wikimedia/Falk2, CC-SA4 licence.
 IRSE News |  Issue 286  |  March 2022
17
trapping protection so that an overrunning train passes onto 
a section of line that is hopefully clear of other trains, rather 
than into the path of another train. This interlocking feature is commonly known as flank protection.
When used in dark territory (railway lines not controlled by 
signals but using train orders or track warrants to authorise movements), trap points are usually locally operated by hand with suitable locking arrangements to prevent misuse. 
They may be the responsibility of others rather than the 
signal engineer.
Trap points are still used at many locations on railways 
throughout the world, but catch points are rare on modern 
railways. They were provided on steep inclines in the days when railway vehicles were unbraked. If a train split in two as it ascended an incline, the back portion would run back down the gradient. The function of the catch points was to 
derail the vehicles as they ran back, to avoid the possibility 
of them running further downhill and colliding with another train. Catch points were generally not worked either by the 
signalman or the interlocking. As the train ascended the gradient it passed over the points in the trailing direction. 
The switch blades would be moved into the correct position by the wheels and return to the derail position after the train had passed. Self-evidently, unworked catch points were only 
installed on uni-directional lines!
Finally, although outside the scope of this article since they are 
not points, it is worth noting that derailers are widely used in North America and elsewhere as an alternative to trap points.
They take various forms, usually a bolt-on to the running 
rail (there is no movable switch rail). When set to derail, the mechanism forces the wheels up and over the running rail thereby derailing the vehicle(s). Derailers may be operated by 
a hand lever (often called a “switchstand” in North America), or 
by power, and they may be fitted with locks and detectors for integration into the signalling system.Closing thoughts
In these two articles we have explored the basics of points and point operation, and the role of signalling and the signal engineer in ensuring they work safely. More varieties of points 
exist than we have covered, not only for main line and metro 
railways, but also for rural and low density railways, tram railways, rack railways, dual gauge railways and more. But the principles of safe operation are more or less the same.
If you are new to railway signalling we encourage you to ask 
your mentor or manager to arrange a visit to a set of points so that you can see for yourself what you have read about in these articles. But take care and obey all the safety rules – 
points are hazardous, and so are the trains that run over them.
In a future article we will look at the maintenance of points 
from a signal engineering point of view, including specifically 
the use of remote condition monitoring.
Francis would like to thank the following for their assistance 
with his points back to basics articles. John Alexander, Allan Neilson, Trevor Bradbeer, Andy Knight, Steve Franklin 
and his team at Network Rail, and Brian Counter from the 
Permanent Way Institution.Figure 11 – An example of a catch point that derails trains. 
Photo Network Rail.
About the author
Francis How has been a long-time member of the IRSE, 
throughout his distinguished career. First with British Rail/Railtrack, with Atkins, and then as the technical director of 
the Railway Industry Association. He was a Thorrowgood 
scholar (awarded to those who have excelled in the Institution’s exam) and served on IRSE Council for many years, and became the president of the Institution in 2012-
2013. He was appointed as the chief executive of the IRSE 
from 2015 to 2018 and led many of the improvements to the Institution. Francis is widely respected in the industry for his professionalism and extensive technical knowledge.