24
Back to basics: Points maintenance 
and remote condition monitoring
Trevor Bradbeer
In this article, which continues the Back-to-basics 
series on points (see February and March 2022 editions of IRSE News), we will be considering three general and related subject areas: scheduled maintenance; fault-finding; and how Remote Condition Monitoring (RCM) can assist with both of these. Initially we will consider faulting and maintenance in the more traditional sense BC (Before Condition monitoring!), and then move on to AD (Assisted Digitally!).
Timely and effective maintenance of the point 
actuating mechanism and the Switch and Crossing 
(S&C) is essential for the safe operation of the railway. As far as possible, signalling technology developments have tended to reduce or eliminate moving and mechanically vulnerable parts such as relays, filament lamps, searchlight signals and physical panel controls. However, so long as wheels run on rails there will always be the need to switch trains between tracks, and therefore points will be required.
Why maintenance matters
It is not hard to envisage that a mechanism pushing with 
a force measured in thousands of Newtons, to millimetre accuracy, that is run over by hundreds of tons of train moving 
at speed will need to be maintained on a regular basis to 
keep it in reliable working order! Maintenance of points, as with other signalling assets, must be performed at intervals that are frequent enough to ensure any signs of deterioration 
are captured and rectified on a timely basis, especially where 
safety is concerned.
The maintenance can be considered in two parts: the track, 
covering the rails, chairs, crossing etc.; and the signalling, 
covering the point actuating, lock and detection mechanism. 
Inevitably these two functions overlap, and representatives from both departments may attend the same maintenance event to perform their specific tasks, whilst also advising and 
assisting the other department in theirs. Other personnel might 
also be involved, for example to maintain point heating where required; in the UK this is usually undertaken by Electrification & Plant (E&P) personnel, and is outside the scope of this article.
Ultimately the purpose of all maintenance is to ensure the 
asset is presentable, operating safely, within acceptable 
(preferably optimal) parameters, and is able to do so for as long 
as possible. Maintenance activities can therefore be divided along these lines: safety; performance; and life (prolonging) - with a number of them falling into more than one category. 
Maintenance can also be divided into preventive maintenance 
and corrective maintenance. 
Scheduled (preventive) maintenance
For reasons stated previously, scheduled maintenance is by its very nature preventive maintenance; it is aimed at ensuring that the equipment remains in good working order. 
The nature of the maintenance can range from a simple 
visual examination to cleaning, re-greasing, measuring and gauging. Gauging (testing for mechanical correctness using a tool of known dimensions) and measurement (using a scaled 
instrument to determine a quantitative value) might reveal that 
the equipment is out of tolerance and requires adjustment or renewal. Visual examination might also reveal defects that need to be corrected.
Corrective maintenance
If during scheduled maintenance some property of the points is found to be outside the acceptable parameters it will be necessary to carry out corrective maintenance. This could be 
as simple as a small adjustment to the drive or detection, or as 
complex as switch or machine renewal. Clearly the nature and severity of the problem identified will determine its priority in planned works. If the problem is safety related and cannot be 
rectified immediately it might be necessary to restrict the use 
or position of the points, and/or the speed of trains over them.
Scheduled maintenance intervals
Scheduled maintenance is generally divided into two types. Firstly, a frequent service activity covering light maintenance and essential safety checks might be carried out once every 
three months, or as recommended by the manufacturer. Such 
 IRSE News |  Issue 288  |  May 2022
25
servicing might be performed more frequently for ‘key points’ 
whose operation is in high demand and therefore essential for many train movements, such as at a junction where two 
busy routes converge. Failure of these key points would incur 
high train delay penalties and/or damage the reputation of the train operator. 
In addition to this, a more detailed maintenance activity is 
undertaken less frequently, typically annually. This includes further tests and checks on components that are not expected to deteriorate quickly, for which an annual check is sufficient. 
Maintenance standards
The maintenance standards adopted by a particular infrastructure owner/maintainer might be the manufacturer’s recommendations and instructions themselves, as is the 
case in some countries. Alternatively, the manufacturer’s 
recommendations may be used as the basis of standards produced and issued by the relevant authority (e.g., Network Rail, in the case of the main line in Great Britain). 
Each approach has its merits. Following the manufacturer’s 
instructions directly, once approved by the relevant authority, is a potentially easier and more direct approach, whereas standards produced by the infrastructure owner will have the 
advantage of being consistent across all types of assets, and 
take into account the individual needs of the infrastructure owner that the manufacturer might not include.
It is beyond the scope of this article to consider all the myriad 
forms of point operating mechanism and associated specific maintenance activities. But most points share common categories of maintenance activity, as shown in the following example. This brings together the considerations and factors 
discussed so far and puts them into context. Although some 
standard British mainline railway documentation has been referenced, the principles are likely to apply to the majority of cases on other railways.Permanent Way maintenance
Before attempting to check the correct operation of the points operating mechanism it is necessary to ensure that the trackwork S&C is in good working order; there is no sense 
and indeed some danger in adjusting the point operating 
mechanism to compensate for an S&C problem.
First and foremost, it is essential that the track gauge at the 
points is correctly maintained throughout the whole length of 
the points at all times. If the rails are out of gauge anywhere in the S&C, temporary measures might be implemented, such as using packing pieces, to restore the correct dimension. However, a permanent fix, such as overhaul and renewal of 
components, should be arranged as soon as possible. 
Secondly, it is important that the integrity of the rail furniture 
such as chairs and stretcher bars (where provided) is 
maintained. The traditional design of stretcher bars has come 
under considerable scrutiny in recent years and new products have been introduced in many cases. Mechanical stress in the traditional stretcher bar can be high and result in metal fatigue, most commonly seen as broken bars or brackets 
(‘shoes’). Chair bolts, rail fastenings and stretcher bars must all 
be examined and tightened, adjusted or replaced as necessary. Wooden sleepers in particular should be checked for signs of deterioration. Switch rails should move smoothly in the slide 
chairs without excess friction (more about this later). 
Thirdly, the profile of the rails should be checked. Switch and 
stock rails are shaped (profiled) to fit together tightly when closed so, as to present a relatively smooth transition for 
passing trains. Over time both the stock rails and switch rails 
can wear. Stock rails may show ‘lipping’ where the rail head has been rolled out and this may even risk fouling the switch rail. Switch rails, being very narrow at the tips, are prone to 
chips and cracks if not aligned correctly and could be struck 
by passing wheels. Repair work such as grinding or welding is likely to be needed, and ultimately renewal might be required.
Points and crossings are an essential part of the railway infrastructure, and their effective 
maintenance is critically important. Their location often poses challenges in carrying out this 
work safely and without disrupting service.
 IRSE News |  Issue 288  |  May 2022
26
Fourthly, the lateral movement of the switch rails on the slide 
chairs needs to be checked. One of the most common and frustrating issues with switch rails is combating the friction that 
is inevitably associated with sliding components. Initially the 
chairs will be greased but as the points are moved the grease will be progressively worn away, and can build up in places where it might interfere with the operation of the points. 
Removal of old, tarry grease deposits and the application of 
new lubricant is necessarily a frequent maintenance activity, otherwise the slide chairs will become ‘dry’ and the excess friction will cause increasing stress on the point mechanism, until eventually it is unable to complete the movement. 
Innovations to address this have included using materials with 
naturally lower friction, such as nylon, or providing rollers in the slide chair that support the switch as it moves into position. In both of these cases grease must not be applied as it can 
interfere with the correct operation of the components.
Finally, and perhaps harder to ascertain, is the stability of the 
ballast. As anyone who has watched train wheels pass over points or indeed plain line will confirm, seemingly solid and 
immovable rails will bend visibly under a passing train to some 
extent, depending on its speed and weight. Over time this can lead to ‘voids’ in the ballast leaving the points partially unsupported and possibly twisted or warped. Visual inspection 
might indicate that voids are present, or train-borne or 
trackside instrumentation may provide evidence. 
Some point mechanisms, notably ones that clamp the switch 
and stock rail together, are notoriously sensitive to this kind 
of rail deformation and can fail at short notice. Adjustments 
made to compensate for the rail deformation might overcome problems such as loss of detection, but then be defeated when the track moves again. 
There are various ways of preventing or reducing the risks 
associated with voids and rail deformation. Solid track (slab track), which has a concrete base, does not suffer from this problem of course, but is more expensive to produce. Some 
companies offer chemical or mechanical products to help 
stabilise the ballast formation. The problem of point failure as a result of rail deformation can also mitigated by the use of ‘in bearer’ operating mechanisms, which are contained within 
a steel sleeper.Signalling maintenance
The activities listed here are typical, but might not all be 
relevant for a given installation or environment, and some operating mechanisms might require additional signalling 
maintenance activities.
Signalling maintenance personnel need to pay attention to 
the S&C, not just the points operating mechanism. Some maintenance measurements are made by both track and 
signalling personnel. These include free wheel clearance 
(FWC), free wheel passage (FWP) and residual switch opening (RSO). All of these measurements are aimed at ensuring that on the open switch rail the train wheels have sufficient space 
to run without causing ‘flange back contact’, whereby the back 
edge of a passing wheel flange is rubbing against the back edge of the open switch rail. Such an event risks the wheel riding up on the switch and causing a derailment, as happened at Grayrigg, Cumbria, UK, in 2007. 
FWC and FWP are checked by running a gauge towards the 
heel end of the open switch rail. Additionally, it is necessary to measure the distance between the open switch and the stock 
rail at the toe; a typical value for this is 108mm but it can vary 
by switch type.
Checking the RSO involves measuring the gap between 
the closed switch rail and the stock rail where the rail head 
profile is shaped to ensure the two fit together well. This 
measurement is made at intervals from the toe towards the heel end of the switch rail. Figure 1 shows the typical measurements made.
Signalling maintainers will check for the tightness, correctness 
and security of points fittings and stretcher bars (where provided), drive mechanisms, cranks, rods, detectors etc. to ensure that nothing is loose, cracked or out of adjustment. 
Seasonal maintenance may include additional measures, 
e.g. to minimise frozen points in winter by applying frost-resistant grease.
The environment in which the points are operating must 
be checked for cleanliness and freedom from potential obstructions. This means removing debris such as litter and vegetation that could find its way into the gap between an 
Free wheel passageFlange back spacingResidual switch
opening
Flange back
clearanceMeasured track gauge (static)
Free wheel clearance
(switch opening/flangeway)Figure 1 – Simplified diagram of typical measurements made during maintenance.Based on diagram in Network Rail standard NR/SMS/Part C/PF01.
 IRSE News |  Issue 288  |  May 2022
27
open switch and the adjacent stock rail, which would interfere 
with the movement of the points. An excessively high ballast shoulder must be brought down to an acceptable height, to 
reduce the risk of pieces of ballast obstructing the movement.
The identity of the points and more specifically the operating 
mechanism is indicated at some suitable position on or 
adjacent to the points. In the UK, by convention the identity 
plate is fixed on a sleeper close to the toe of the points on the side nearest the normally closed switch. Though a seemingly minor matter, the presence, legibility and correctness of the points’ identity is crucial for accurate communications and safe 
actions during engineering works and when operational issues 
make it necessary to move the points manually.
In track circuited areas the stretcher bars and other lateral 
fittings are fitted with insulating layers to prevent a short 
circuit across the rails. These insulations must be checked for presence and good condition to minimise the risk of a track circuit failure.
Finally, and most importantly, we consider the maintenance of 
the point operating mechanism itself. If there is one test that is common among various types of point operating mechanism it is the Facing Point Lock (FPL) test. This test is designed to 
prove that the points can only be locked on the ground if the 
closed switch is within an acceptable distance (3.5mm being typical) of its fully closed position at the toe of the points (for safety) and are guaranteed to lock if the measurement is typically not more than 1.5mm (for reliability). The test is made 
typically by inserting a 3.5mm gauge between the switch and 
stock rail in line with the first slide chair bolt and moving the points manually towards it until the lock jams. The test is then repeated with a 1.5mm gauge in the same position to prove 
that the lock engages. If either test fails, and provided that the 
S&C has been verified as in good order, an adjustment to the lock mechanism will be required.
In a similar vein to the FPL test is the detection test, which in 
theory is carried out in the same way but using 3.5mm/5mm 
gauges. This test would be naturally hindered by the action of the lock, and so is carried out either by ‘floating’ the lock (compensating for the detection gauge by moving the lock 
out of the way) or by using slotted gauges that can fit around 
the detector rods and displace them by the required distance (3.5mm to achieve detection, 5mm to break detection).The specific maintenance tasks on a point operating mechanism itself vary considerably from machine to machine depending on the type of drive used and the locking/detection 
method. In general they will entail checks on the physical 
condition of the machine and drive, its fastenings, lubrication, fluid level for hydraulics, and mechanical wear on facing surfaces. Different lubricants might be required, or none at all, 
according to the type of mechanism involved. A drive-train of 
gears could require a different grease from that required for the drive rods - and will certainly be different to that applied to the slide chairs!
Detection mechanisms usually rely on some form of electrical 
contact being made, either microswitches or open contacts. These are frequently the cause when a detection failure occurs and therefore must be checked with gauges as part 
of routine maintenance. Either a distance gauge is used (in 
the case of microswitches) to determine the points at which they ‘flip’ between their two states or, in the case of open contacts by using a spring tension gauge to check the force holding the contacts closed. Other contacts for controlling the 
motor or clutch mechanisms might also require checking in a 
similar manner.
Using remote condition monitoring to optimise 
maintenance
The traditional preventive maintenance we have described 
uses time intervals between maintenance events that is based on the likelihood of failure and maintaining a high level of 
confidence in the safe functioning of the assets. There are 
several reasons why this approach is not optimal, including the labour-intensive nature of the work, the cost of possibly unnecessary maintenance activities, the risk to staff working 
trackside, and the reduced availability of the assets for service. 
A modern, efficient railway needs a more intelligent approach 
and a different philosophy. From an economic point of view, there is an optimum point where the level of maintenance has 
minimal adverse business impact (see Figure 2). Maintaining 
an asset too often is expensive, disruptive to the operation of the railway and may cause more failures because personnel are examining equipment and possibly interfering with what 
was a perfectly operating point machine. On the other hand, 
maintaining too infrequently will indeed lead to an increase in failures and consequential cost penalties. Increasing cost
of failure or 
downtime
Cost of
maintaining 
assetEconomic
optimumPremium paid to
reduce failures to a
small but still 
non-zero valueLikelihood of failure
CostPremium paid for less
frequent maintenance
but with higher cost to
repair and compensateFigure 2 – the economics of remote condition monitoring can be quite complex.
 IRSE News |  Issue 288  |  May 2022
28
What is needed is a system that will allow maintenance 
intervals to be optimised. Ideally these intervals would be longer than those traditionally used, but more importantly they 
would be both adjusted and adjustable to achieve cost, safety 
and availability requirements. This could in theory be done manually by making repeated measurements of the operation of the points and plotting them on graph paper in order to 
determine acceptable maintenance intervals, but that would 
clearly be a somewhat “trial and error” process, involving even more work at the trackside to collect the data.
Fortunately, developments in sensor, digital processing, 
storage and communication technology have brought about 
a range of different remote condition monitoring products that can measure key parameters of points operation without the need for personnel to repeatedly go onto the track. Note, 
by the way that we use the abbreviation RCM for Remote 
Condition Monitoring here, not to be confused with Reliability Centred Maintenance.
It is now possible to measure a point machine system very 
comprehensively, using such parameters as:
• Load or force on the drive rod (trackside load cell).
• Displacement (distance travelled, trackside sensor).
• Motor current and voltage (sensors in the location feeding 
electric power to the motor).
• Hydraulic pressure and oil level (already provided on some power packs).
• Detection lost and gained (contact event monitoring or current sensors).
• Rail temperature (sensors on rails).
Measuring many of these parameters requires direct intervention in the point operating mechanism, which could make it more difficult to maintain or renew, thus defeating the 
objectives of RCM. In the early part of this century Network Rail 
ran a trial at Peterborough Training Centre, Cambridgeshire, UK, to determine how accurately just one factor, namely motor current, could be used to determine the overall condition of 
the points from a reliability perspective. The apparent success 
of this trial meant that most other factors would not need to be fitted in future systems, although voltage readings are still 
useful for calculating power consumption and detecting a 
failing battery or supply. 
Detecting motor current requires no direct connection to the 
points circuits and can be done with sensors clipped around 
the power supply wiring. Where discrete circuits are used to drive the points in each direction a separate sensor is required for each circuit, which can also be used to determine the driven direction. Where three phase supplies are used one 
sensor is required for each phase and must be connected 
before the power switching relay, otherwise the phase reversal used to change the driven direction can also upset the calculations made by the data logger, especially if a voltage 
sensor is being used to calculate power consumption as well. 
Voltage, current and detection event monitoring can all be performed away from the trackside and are therefore ideal parameters to be used.
A data logger is used to monitor and buffer a set of samples 
from its sensors, usually at about 100 samples per second, on a rolling memory basis until a trigger value is reached (usually the current at the start of the point movement). From then on 
it will keep some of the samples already taken and record the 
current for the duration of the movement before sending all this data to a server for storage and analysis.
Timing detection events, from the loss of detection (e.g., when 
the points are commanded to move from normal to reverse) 
to gaining it again (when reverse detection is obtained), is a simple indicator of health when plotted as a trend over time. Statistically significant variations from the usual time can be 
raised as alarms (e.g., 1.5s longer than usual), particularly if 
there is a consistent and progressive change seen over time. However, this is also quite a ‘blunt instrument’ means of monitoring health, and gives little indication of the stress the points might be experiencing as they move.
Motor current is another good indicator of the health of 
the points. The more stress the machine is under to move the switch rails, the greater the current drawn will be. When 
plotted graphically it is possible to identify the key stages in the 
Above, a current clamp of the type used for remote condition 
monitoring of AC-driven points.
Right RCM data logger display.
 IRSE News |  Issue 288  |  May 2022
29
About the author
Trevor Bradbeer BSc (Hons) CEng Cert Ed MIRSE, 
started his career as a trainee technician with British Rail in September 1985. In 1988 he started teaching 
basic signalling, telecoms and electrical principles at 
the Ilford Training Centre. He went on to various roles in the London area before returning to training and competence management. 
In 2004 when maintenance transferred to Network Rail, 
Trevor stayed with Balfour Beatty working in projects involving computer-based signal works testing and remote condition monitoring, evolving from relay data 
loggers to leading-edge condition monitoring systems. 
He completed a software engineering degree in 2003, became a MIRSE in 2006 and gained his CEng in 2013. He also spent several years on points RCM projects for 
SMRT/SBS in Singapore and MTR in Hong Kong. In 2019 
Trevor retired but still works for Signet Solutions in Derby, providing training and consultancy services.
operation such as initial motor inrush, unlocking, travel, locking and braking/stopping. Excessive current levels compared with that considered ‘usual’ for each point machine can be used 
to trigger alarms and bring the equipment to the technician’s 
attention. The analysis and raising of an alarm has evolved and improved over time because the difference between a slightly outlying but correct operation versus a developing fault can 
be subtle, and barely detectable by simple threshold detection. 
It can also result in a lot of false positives that can undermine confidence in the RCM system. Some companies have developed machine learning algorithms to help distinguish between these, so as not to bombard the technician with 
information that requires a great deal of experience to interpret 
and understand.
Calculating power consumption can be a slightly more 
accurate and informative parameter, but it requires a voltage 
sensor that measures the variations which occur under load. A plot of instantaneous power (the power consumed at any given instant) can be converted into a measure of total power consumption by calculating the area under the graph. The 
resulting value can then be added to a scatter graph or similar 
to observe progressive changes over time.
One further benefit of RCM is that it demonstrates when 
maintenance has been effective. If the points are observed 
by RCM to be going out of specification, an additional maintenance activity can be scheduled, which should bring the points back to within normal operating parameters. Using RCM it is obvious when this has happened as the graphs and 
plots will show an immediate improvement in operation time, 
power consumption etc. If this does not happen it could point to other causes that need to be investigated. In the past RCM has been seen as associated specifically with signalling personnel, so it has been difficult to get some track personnel to agree a diagnosis when the data suggests a 
P-Way/S&C problem. Hopefully this is changing and a spirit of 
co-operation, together with the open sharing of this data, will bring about a united approach to improve points performance for the benefit of everyone.
The example RCM plots above show a normal (top) profile for points movement, and the profile where there is an issue 
to be rectified, with far more power required to complete the movement.