1 RSE /
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Back to basics: Points maintenance
and remote condition monitoring
Trevor Bradbeer
In this article; which continues the Back-to-basics
required; in the UK this is usually undertaken by Electrification
series on points (see February and March 2022 editions
8 Plant (EGP) personnel, and is outside the scope of this article.
of IRSE News), we will be
considering three generaland
Ultimately the purpose of all maintenance is to ensure the
related subject areas: scheduled maintenance; fault-
asset is presentable, operating safely, within acceptable
finding; and how Remote Condition Monitoring (RCM)
(preferably optimal) parameters, and is able to do so foras long
can assist with both of these. Initially we will consider
as possible. Maintenance activities can therefore be divided
faulting and maintenance in the more traditional sense
along these lines: safety; performance; and life (prolonging)
BC (Before Condition monitoring!), and then move on
with a number ofthem falling into more than one category.
to AD (Assisted Digitally!).
Maintenance can also be divided into preventive maintenance
and corrective maintenance.
Timely and effective maintenance of the point
actuating mechanism and the Switch and Crossing
Scheduled (preventive) maintenance
(SSC) is essential for the safe operation of the railway。
For reasons stated previously, scheduled maintenance is
As far as possible, signalling technology developments
by its
nature preventive maintenance; itis aimed at
have tended to reduce or eliminate moving and
ensuring that the equipment remains in good working order。
mechanically vulnerable parts such as relays, flament
The nature of the maintenance can range from
simple
Visual examination to cleaning, re-greasing, measuring and
lamps, searchlight signals and physical panel controls。
gauging. Gauging (testing for mechanical correctness using
However, so long as Wheels run on rails there Will
tool of known dimensions) and measurement (using a scaled
always be the need to switch trains between tracks, and
instrument to determine a quantitative value) might reveal that
therefore points Will be required。
the equipment is out of tolerance and requires adjustment
orrenewal. Visual examination might also reveal defects that
Why maintenance matters
need to be corrected。
It is not hard to envisage that a mechanism pushing with
force measured in thousands of Newtons, to millimetre
Corrective maintenance
accuracy, that is run over by hundreds of tons of train moving
If during scheduled maintenance some property ofthe points
at speed Will need to be maintained on
regular basis to
is found to be outside the acceptable parameters it Will be
keep it in reliable working order! Maintenance of points,
a5
necessary to carry out corrective maintenance. This could be
with other signalling assets, must be performed at intervals
as simple as
a small adjustment to the drive or detection,
Oras
that are frequent enough to ensure any signs of deterioration
complex as switch or machine renewal. Clearly the nature and
are captured and rectified on a timely basis, especially Where
severity of the problem identified Will determine its priority in
safety is concerned
planned Works
If the problem is safety related and cannot be
The maintenance can be considered in two parts: the track
rectified immediately it might be necessary to restrict the use
covering the rails, chairs, crossing etc =
and the signalling,
OI
position of the points, andlor the speed of trains over them
covering the point actuating, lock and detection mechanism。
Scheduled maintenance intervals
Inevitably these two functions overlap, and representatives
from both departments may attend the same maintenance
Scheduled maintenance is generally divided into two types_
event to perform their specific tasks_
Whilst also advising and
Firstly, a frequent service activity covering light maintenance
assisting the other department in theirs_
Other personnel might
and essential safety checks might be carried out once every
also be involved, for example to maintain point heating Where
three months, or as recommended by the manufacturer. Such
24
BACK
TO
BASICS
Very

IRSE News
Issue 288
May 2022
Points and crossings are an essential part of the railway infrastructure, and their effective
maintenance is critically important_
Their location often poses challenges in carrying out this
Work safely and without disrupting service
servicing might be performed more frequently for
points'
Permanent
maintenance
Whose operation is in high demand and therefore essential
Before attempting to check the correct operation ofthe
for many train movements, such as at a junction where two
points operating mechanism it is necessary to ensure that the
busy routes converge. Failure ofthese
points would incur
trackwork SGCis in good working order; there is no sense
high train delay penalties andlor damage the reputation of the
and indeed some dangerin adjusting the point operating
train operator。
mechanism to compensate foran SSC problem
In addition to this, a more detailed maintenance activity is
First and foremost, it is essential that the track gauge at the
undertaken less frequently, typically annually. This includes
points is correctly maintained throughout the whole length of
further tests and checks on components that are not expected
the points at all times
Ifthe rails are out of gauge anywhere
to deteriorate quickly, for whichan annual check is sufficient.
in the SGC, temporary measures might be implemented, such
Maintenance standards
a5
packing pieces;to restore the correct dimension
However
permanent fix, such as overhaul and renewal of
The maintenance standards adopted by a particular
components, should be arranged as soon as possible。
infrastructure owner /maintainer might be the manufacturer's
recommendations and instructions themselves,as is the
Secondly, it is important that the integrity of the rail furniture
case in some countries. Alternatively, the manufacturer's
suchas chairs and stretcher bars (where provided) is
recommendations may be used as the basis of standards
maintained
The traditional design of stretcher bars has come
produced and issued by the relevant authority (e.9., Network
under considerable scrutiny in recent years and new products
Rail, in the case of the main line in Great Britain).
have been introduced in many cases. Mechanical stress in
the traditional stretcher bar can be high and result in metal
Each approach has its merits. Following the manufacturer's
fatigue; most commonly seen as broken bars or brackets
instructions directly, once approved by the relevant authority,
('shoes'). Chair bolts, rail fastenings and stretcher bars must all
is
potentially easier and more direct approach, whereas
be examined and tightened, adjusted or replaced as necessary_
standards produced by the infrastructure owner will have the
Wooden sleepers in particular should be checked for signs of
advantage of being consistent across all types of assets, and
deterioration. Switch rails should move smoothly in the slide
take into account the individual needs of the infrastructure
chairs without excess friction (more about this later).
owner that the manufacturer might not include_
Thirdly, the profile of the rails should be checked 
Switchand
Itis beyond the scope of this article to consider all the
stock rails are shaped (profiled) to fit together tightly when
forms of point operating mechanism and associated specific
closed So, as to present a relatively smooth transition for
maintenance activities _
But most points share common
passing trains. Over time both the stock rails and switch rails
categories of maintenance activity, as shown in the following
can Wear. Stock rails may show 'lipping' where the rail head
example. This brings together the considerations and factors
has been rolled out and this may even risk fouling the switch
discussed so far and puts them into context. Although some
rail. Switch rails, being Very narrow at the tips, are prone to
standard British mainline railway documentation has been
chips and cracks if not aligned correctly and could be struck
referenced, the principles are likely to apply to the majority of
by passing wheels Repair work such as grinding or welding is
cases on other railways_
likely to be needed,and ultimately renewal might be required.
25
key
Way
key
using
myriad

IRSE News
Issue 288
May 2022
Fourthly, the lateral movement of the switch rails on the slide
Signalling maintenance
chairs needs to be checked 
One ofthe most common and
The activities listed here are typical, but might not all be
frustrating issues With switch rails is combating the friction that
relevant for a given installation or environment, and some
is inevitably associated with sliding components. Initially the
operating mechanisms might require additional signalling
chairs Will be greased but as the points are moved the grease
maintenance activities.
Will be progressively worn away, and can build up in places
Where it might interfere with the operation of the points。
Signalling maintenance personnel need to pay attention to
Removal of old, tarry grease deposits and the application of
the SsC, not just the points operating mechanism. Some
new lubricant is necessarily a frequent maintenance activity,
maintenance measurements are made by both track and
otherwise the slide chairs Will become 'dry' and the excess
signalling personnel. These include free Wheel clearance
friction Will cause increasing stress on the point mechanism,
(FWC), free wheel passage (FWP) and residual switch opening
until eventually itis unable to complete the movement_
(RSO). Allof these measurements are aimed at ensuring that
Innovations to address this have included using materials With
on the open switch rail the train wheels have sufficient space
naturally lower friction, such as nylon, or providing rollers in
to run without causing 'flange back contact' ,
Whereby the back
the slide chair that support the switch as it moves into position
edge of a passing Wheel flange is rubbing against the back
In both of these cases grease must not be applied as it can
edge of the open switch rail. Such an event risks the wheel
interfere with the correct operation ofthe components
riding up on the switch and causing
derailment
a5
happened
at Grayrigg; Cumbria, UKin 2007.
Finally, and perhaps harder to ascertain, is the stability of the
ballast. As anyone Who has watched train wheels pass over
FWC and FWPare checked by running a gauge towards the
points or indeed plain line will confirm, seemingly solid and
heel end of the open switch rail. Additionally, it is necessary to
immovable rails will bend visibly under
passing train to some
measure the distance between the open switch and the stock
extent, depending on its speed and weight. Over time this
rail at the toe; a typical value for this is Io8mm but it can
can lead to 'Voids' in the ballast leaving the points partially
by switch type:
unsupported and possibly twisted or warped. Visual inspection
Checking the RSO involves measuring the gap between
might indicate that voids are present
Ortrain-borne Or
the closed switch railand the stock rail where the rail head
trackside instrumentation may provide evidence.
profile is shaped to ensure the two fit together well. This
Some point mechanisms, notably ones that clamp the switch
measurement is made at intervals from the toe towards
and stock rail
together, are notoriously sensitive to this kind
the heelend of the switch rail. Figure 1 shows the typical
Of rail deformationand can fail at short notice. Adjustments
measurements made
made to compensate for the rail deformation might overcome
Signalling maintainers will check for the tightness, correctness
problems such as loss of detection, but then be defeated when
and security of points fittings and stretcher bars (where
the track moves again。
provided), drive mechanisms, cranks, rods, detectors etc. to
There are various ways of preventing or reducing the risks
ensure that
nothing is loose, cracked or out of adjustment。
associated with Voids and rail deformation. Solid track (slab
Seasonal maintenance may include additional measures
track), which has
a concrete base; does not suffer from this
e.9.to minimise frozen points in Winter by applying frost-
problem of course; but is more expensive to produce. Some
resistant grease
companies offer chemical or mechanical products to help
The environment in Which the points are operating must
stabilise the ballast formation. The problem of point failure as
be checked for cleanliness and freedom from potential
a result Of rail deformation can also mitigated by the use of
obstructions. This means removing debris such as litter and
'in bearer' operating mechanisms, which are contained within
vegetation that could find its way into the gap betweenan
a Steel
sleeper。
Figure 1
Simplified diagram of typical measurements made during maintenance_
Based on diagram in Network Rail standard NR/SMS/Part C/PFOI.
Measured track gauge (static)
Residual switch
Free Wheel clearance
(switch openinglflangeway)
opening
Flange back spacing
Free Wheel passage
让
Flange back
clearance
26
Vary

IRSE News
Issue 288
May 2022
Figure 2
the economics of remote condition monitoring can be quite complex.
Premium paid to
Premium paid for Iess
reduce failures to a
frequent maintenance
small but still
but with higher cost to
non-zero Value
repair and compensate
詈
5
Economic
Increasing cost
optimum
offailure or

downtime
Cost of
maintaining
asset
Cost
open switch and the adjacent stock rail, which would interfere
The specific maintenance tasks on
point operating
with the movement of the points. An excessively high ballast
mechanism itself
considerably from machine to machine
shoulder must be brought down toan
acceptable height, to
depending on the type of drive used and the
lockingldetection
reduce the risk of pieces of ballast obstructing the movement
method.In general
Will entail checks on the physical
condition of the machine and drive, its fastenings, lubrication
The identity of the points and more specifically the operating
fluid level for hydraulics, and mechanical wear on facing
mechanism is indicated at some suitable position on Or
surfaces
Different lubricants might be required, or none atall,
adjacent to the points. In the UK, by convention the identity
according to the type of mechanism involved.
A drive-train of
plate is fixed on
sleeper close to the toe of the points on the
gears could require a different grease from that required for
side nearest the normally closed switch. Though a seemingly
the drive rods
and Will certainly be different to that applied to
minor matter, the presence, legibility and correctness ofthe
the slide chairs!
points' identity is crucial for accurate communications and safe
actions during engineering works and when operational issues
Detection mechanisms usually rely on some form of electrical
make it necessary to move the
points manually:
contact being made, either microswitches or open contacts。
These are frequently the cause when a detection failure
In track circuited areas the stretcher bars and other lateral
Occurs and therefore must be checked with gauges as part
fittings are fitted with insulating layers to prevent a short
ofroutine maintenance. Either a distance gauge is used (in
Circuit across the rails
These insulations must be checked for
the case of microswitches) to determine the points at Which
presence and good condition to minimise the risk of a track
they 'flip' between their tWo states or, in the case ofopen
Circuit failure
contacts by using
spring tension gauge to check the force
Finally, and most importantly, we consider the maintenance of
holding the contacts closed. Other contacts for controlling the
the point operating mechanism itself. If there is one test that is
motor or clutch mechanisms might also require checking in
common among various types of point operating mechanism
similar manner。
it is the Facing Point Lock (FPL) test. This test is designed to
prove that the points can only be locked on the ground ifthe
Using remote condition monitoring to optimise
Closed switch is withinan
acceptable distance (3.Smm being
maintenance
typical) of its fully closed position at the toe of the points
The traditional preventive maintenance we have described
(for safety) and are guaranteed to lock if the measurement is
uses time intervals between maintenance events that is based
typically not more than 1.Smm (for reliability). The test is made
on the likelihood of failure and maintaining
high levelof
typically by inserting
3.Smm gauge between the switch and
confidence in the safe functioning of the assets。
There are
stock rail in line With the first slide chair bolt and moving the
several reasons Why this approach is not optimal, including
points manually towards it until the lock jams. The test is then
the labour-intensive nature of the work, the cost of possibly
repeated with a 1Smm gauge in the same position to prove
unnecessary maintenance activities, the risk to staff working
that the lock engages. If either test fails, and provided that the
trackside, and the reduced availability of the assets for service_
SGC has been verified as in good order, an adjustment to the
lock mechanism Will be required.
A modern, efficient railway needs a more intelligent approach
and
different philosophy. From an economic point of view,
In
a similar Vein to the FPL test is the detection test whichin
there is an optimum point where the level of maintenance has
theory is carried out in the same way but using 3.Smmlsmm
minimal adverse business impact (see Figure 2). Maintaining
gauges. This test would be naturally hindered by the action
an asset too often is expensive, disruptive to the operation of
ofthe lock,and so is carried out either by 'floating' the lock
the railway and may cause more failures because personnel
(compensating for the detection gauge by moving the lock
are
examining equipment and possibly interfering With What
out of the way) or by using slotted gauges that can fit around
Was
perfectly operating point machine. On the other hand,
the detector rods and displace them by the required distance
maintaining too infrequently will indeed lead to an increase in
(3.5mm to achieve detection, Smm to break detection).
failures and consequential cost penalties_
27
Vary
they

IRSE News
Issue 288
May 2022
SA 380TX
lDigital states
659 NHR
Relay 8I1
Relay gIq
659 RWR
Relay 412
Relay A20
659 WJR
Relay 413
Relay Kel
6598 NKR
Relay 814
Relyo
6598 RKR
Relay 415
Relay423
5594 NKR
Relay 816
Relay 424
5594 RKR
Relay 417
Relay 425
659NKR
Relay 418
Relay26
OUU
2
罗
0
659 RKR
Relay 810
Change USB
Realtire
MenU
~
analog
Above, a current clamp of the type used for remote condition
monitoring of AC-driven points
Right RCM data logger display。
What is needed is
system that will allow maintenance
be fitted in future systems, although voltage readings are still
intervals to be optimised . Ideally these intervals would be
useful for calculating power consumption and detecting a
longer than those traditionally used, but more importantly they
failing battery or supply。
Would be both adjusted and adjustable to achieve cost, safety
Detecting motor current requires no direct connection to the
and availability requirements。
This could in theory be done
points circuits and can be done with sensors clipped around
manually by making repeated measurements of the operation
the power supply wiring:
Where discrete circuits are used to
ofthe points and plotting them on graph paper in order to
drive the points in each direction a separate sensor is required
determine acceptable maintenance intervals, but that would
foreach circuit which can also be used to determine the
Clearly be
a somewhat "trialand error
process, involving even
driven direction. Where three phase supplies are used one
more Work at the trackside to collect the data
sensor is required foreach phase and must be connected
Fortunately, developments in sensor, digital processing;
before the power switching relay, otherwise the phase reversal
storage and communication technology have brought about
used to change the driven direction can also upset the
range of different remote condition monitoring products
calculations made by the data logger, especially if a voltage
that can measure key parameters of points operation without
sensor is being used to calculate power consumption as well。
the need for personnel to repeatedly go onto the track. Note
Voltage, current and detection event monitoring can all be
by the way that We use the abbreviation RCM for Remote
performed away from the trackside and are therefore ideal
Condition Monitoring here; not to be confused with Reliability
parameters to be used.
Centred Maintenance.
A data
loggeris used to monitor and buffer a set of samples
Itis now possible to measure
point machine system
from its sensors, usually at about 100 samples per second, on
comprehensively, using such parameters as:
rolling memory basis until a trigger value is reached (usually
Load or force on the drive rod (trackside load celll
the current at the start of the point movement). From thenon
Displacement (distance travelled, trackside sensor)_
it Will keep some of the samples already taken and record the
Motor current and voltage (sensors in the location
feeding
current for the duration of the movement before
sendingall
electric power to the motor)
this data to
a server for storage and analysis_
Hydraulic pressure and oil level (already provided on
Timing detection events, from the loss of detection (e. 9., when
some power packs).
the points are commanded to move from normal to reverse)
Detection lostand
gained (contact event monitoring or
to gaining it again (when reverse detection is obtained), is a
current sensors)
simple indicator of health when plotted as a trend over time:
Rail temperature (sensors on rails).
Statistically significant variations from the usual time can be
Measuring many of these parameters requires direct
raised as alarms (e.9., 1.5s longer than usual), particularly if
intervention in the point operating mechanism, Which could
there is a consistent and progressive change seen over time。
make it more difficult to maintain or renew, thus defeating the
However; this is also quite a 'blunt instrument'
means of
objectives of RCM.In the early part of this century Network Rail
monitoring health, and gives little indication of the stress the
ran
a trial at Peterborough Training Centre; Cambridgeshire;
points might be experiencing as
moVe
UK, to determine how accurately just one factor, namely motor
Motor current is another good indicator of the health of
current could be used to determine the overall condition of
the points. The more stress the machine is under to move
the points from
reliability perspective。
The apparent sUccess
the switch rails, the greater the current drawn Will be. When
of this trial meant that most other factors Would not need to
plotted graphically it is possible to identify the key stages in the
28
Very
they

IRSE News
Issue 288
May 2022
Balloyp Bat
Usse
VIEI
Rail
Profile Plot
[ogOOHe
Home
Noa WIlIn Rour 2101/2022
Ah
12352Pow TobINC)
45s-1
Soludl N
Ro
Plul
Prs M
Tog Nume
AUTn
Scodrn
Tg Omapic
CEnsope
Sorl
Balloup Beatty
AsSeLVEw
Rail
Profile Plot
1Lg OIHHp
Hor
IOJ NomUIo Rovorsa 07117071
N
003 1Pon TolLIL/
NEa!
Sood
R
Ce
Fuu
NN
U Nme
Amln
Shoyls
T
TDcription
Emalort
Cnc
The example RCM plots above show a normal (top) profile for points movement, and the profile where there is an issue
to be rectified, with far more power required to complete the movement。
operation such as initial motor inrush, unlocking, travel, locking
In the past RCM has been seen as associated specifically With
and braking/stopping. Excessive current levels compared with
signalling personnel, so it has been difficult to get some track
that considered
usual' foreach point machine can be used
personnel to agree a diagnosis when the data suggests a
to trigger alarms and bring the equipment to the technician's
P-Way/SsC problem. Hopefully this is changing and
Spirit of
attention.
The analysis and raising ofan alarm has evolved and
co-operation, together with the open sharing of this data, Will
improved over time because the difference between a slightly
bring about a united approach to improve points performance
outlying but correct operation versus a developing fault can
for the benefit of everyone
be subtle, and barely detectable by simple threshold detection.
It can also result in a lot of false positives that can undermine
confidence in the RCM system. Some companies have
developed machine learning algorithms to help distinguish
between these; So as not to bombard the technician with
About the author
information that requires a great dealof experience to interpret
and understand
Trevor Bradbeer BSc (Hons) CEng Cert Ed MIRSE,
started his careeras
a trainee technician with British
Calculating power consumption can be a slightly more
Rail in September 1985.In 1988 he started teaching
accurate and informative parameter, but it requires
Voltage
basic signalling, telecoms and electrical principles at
sensor that measures the variations which occur under load.
the Ilford
Training Centre。
He went on to Various roles
A plot of instantaneous power (the power consumed atany
in the London area before returning to training and
given instant) can be converted into a measure oftotal power
competence management
consumption by calculating the area under the graph. The
resulting value can then be added to
a Scatter graph or similar
In 2004 when maintenance transferred to Network Rail,
to observe progressive changes over time。
Trevor stayed with Balfour Beatty working in projects
involving computer-based signal works testing and
One further benefit of RCM is that it demonstrates when
remote condition monitoring, evolving from relay data
maintenance has been effective. If the points are observed
loggers to leading-edge condition monitoring systems_
by RCM to be going out of specification, an additional
He completed
a Software
engineering degree in 2003,
maintenance activity can be scheduled, which should bring
became
MIRSE in 2006 and gained his CEngin 2013.
the points back to within normal operating parameters. Using
He also spent several years on points RCM projects for
RCMitis obvious when this has happened as the graphs and
SMRTISBSin
Singapore and
MTRin Hong Kong. In 2019
plots Will showan immediate improvement in operation time
Trevor retired but still Works for Signet Solutions in Derby,
power consumption etc. If this does not happen it could point
providing training and consultancy services
to other causes that need to be investigated.
29
N