1 RSE /
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Back to basics: SIL
explained
RL
Paul Darlington and Ian Mitchell
Safety Integrity Level (SIL)is an
indicator of the relative risk-
reduction provided by a safety
functionin a device.
A SIL number
Safer
between 1and 4 (SIL 1 being the
lowest levelof safety protection and
SIL 4 the highest) is used to describe
the degree of safety protection
required and the safety reliability of
system Whichis needed to achieve
that protection. It should be noted
that safety reliability is not the same
a5
performance reliability, as this
back-to-basics article Will explain.
For traditional hardware-based
systems, safety is typically specified
and demonstrated in terms of Mean
Time Between Wrong Side Failure
(MTBWSF), which can be calculated
quantified,and instead it is necessary
EN 50126: The specification
from the observed random failure rates
to demonstrate safety by means of
and demonstration of Reliability,
ofthe individual components
When
the rigour ofthe design and validation
Availability, Maintainability
programmable systems began to be
process for the system and the software_
and Safety (RAMS).
usedin
safety critical applications
This is
inevitably
qualitative (as
duplicated or triplicated system
opposed to
quantitative) approach and
EN 50128: Railway applications
architectures were adopted to give very
the SIL system provides an internationally
Communication, signalling
high MTBWSF as a result of random
recognised approach to managing this
and processing systems
Software for railway controland
hardware failures
But What about failure
issue for
safety critical systems。
ofthe software embedded in these
protection systems。
systems? Software failures may appear
The concept of SIL originated in
EN 50129: Railway applications
to be random, but in fact they are always
the International Electrotechnical
Communication, signalling and
systematic; if the circumstances are
Committee standard IEC 61508:
processing systems
Safety related
repeated the result will be the same
This
Functional Safety of Electricall
electronic systems for signalling.
means that any attempt to predict safety
Electronic /Programmable Electronic
Safety Integrity Levels can be assigned to
from observed failure rates of the system
Safety-related Systems. IEC 61508 is
virtually any function presenting
safety
is futile
small change in operating
not railway specific and applies to all
risk. Typical examples of SIL functions
circumstances can reveal or hide a latent
safety engineering disciplines. For the rail
for railare: SIL 1 light metro train speed
defect in the software:
industry CENELEC (European Committee
monitoring and display, SIL 2 monitoring
for Electrotechnical Standardisation)
The solution is to recognise that the
derived the following standards
Of axle box bearing temperature; SIL 3
hazardous failure rate as
a result of
from IEC 61508 to meet railway
depot protection, SIL 4 interlocking of
these 'systematic failures' cannot be
points and signals: The allocation of SIL
specific requirements。
12
BACK
TO
BASICS

舄

IRSE News
Issue 292
October 2022
Safety integrity level
Tolerable Functional
Failure Rate per hour
SIL 1
10-5to 10-6
SIL 2
10-6to 10-7
SIL 3
10-7to 10-8
SIL 4
10
to 10
What the SIL levels mean in terms of tolerable failure rates
takes into account the frequency and severity ofthe risk that
is being managed, and whether there are other systems or
manual processes that can mitigate the effect of a hazardous
system failure。
When
developing systems to
required SIL, techniques are
selected from a list of recommended or mandatory techniques
dependent upon the level of SIL. For example, when creating
the software requirements specification for a SIL 4 system the
techniques include: formal methods, modelling, structured
methodology, and decision tables。
A common
misconception is that individual products or
components have SIL ratings. But simply buying a SIL suitable
component (if possible) does not ensure a SIL system. Rather
products and components may be suitable for use within
given SIL system, but they are not individually SIL rated。
SILlevels apply to safety functions and safety systems, and
A complex railway system will typically employ systems with different
products and components are only suitable for use in specific
SIL levels. Interlocking, train absence detection and automatic train
SILapplications if the end user can ensure that the overall
protection for example may be SIL 4 systems, Whilst the automatic
safety system is implemented correctly. The equipment
train operation and control centre systems may be configured to
or system must also be operated and used in the way i
meet the failure rates ofSIL 2_
WaS
designed in order to achieve the required safety risk
Photo Pixabay /Jan Hlousek。
reduction level
is complicated, time-consuming and expensive; and can lead
The owner/operator must determine the acceptable level of
to lower levels of overall system performance reliability Which
risk based on standards or other factors such as ALARPand
has cost implications.It can also bean obstacle to future
society acceptance of the risk。
A risk level that one owner
enhancements of the system to meet new requirements and
determines is tolerable may be unacceptable to another。
operational circumstances。
Unfortunately, the requirements for a given SlLare not
consistent among allof the functional safety standards across
For example; some industries outside of rail with
a lower
safety
different industries, which does cause some confusion
risk requirement (for example factory production) companies
Will typically accept designs up to SIL 2. Ifan assessment
Some asset owners and project managers may be tempted
indicates a requirement for a higher SIL, owners Will usually
to specify a
high SIL simply for availability reasons, and SIL
require the redesign of the process to lower the intrinsic
is sometimes mistakenly used to imply that a product has
process risk, rather than design the system to achieve SIL 3。
better quality and higher reliability, but this is incorrect. Some
products may be described as 'SIL rated' , suggesting that
In modern railway signalling systems the use of SIL 4is
are suitable for use in safety systems, but this depends on
usually restricted to those parts of the signalling Whichare
many other aspects of the overall system design. Even when
safety critical, for example the interlocking:
Other
ofthe
product genuinely complies with SIL requirements, this only
signalling system, suchas the control panel or workstation, are
provides assurance that it is capable of performing
specific
usually ofa lower SIL value (typically SIL 0 to SIL 2). Network
role within
safety system. Its safety reliability may be high, but
Rail in the UK has recently reviewed its standards to determine
its general reliability may not be.
Where the SIL 4 interlocking could be simplified by deploying
lower SIL functions in another part of the system。
An item is highly available if it does not fail
often and,
When it does, it can be quickly returned to service:
system
Further reading
is considered to be safe if it is reliably performing its safety
Understanding Safety Integrity Levels (SIL) International
function. However, the system may fail much more frequently
Technical Committee (ITC) IRSE News October 2015.
in ways that are considered not to be dangerous (fail safe)。
irse.infolyahut
Therefore;
safety system may be less reliable overall (i.e. with
The Use and Misuse of SILs (2009) Roger Short IRSE News
a lower mean time between failures) than
a non-
safety system
February 2009. irse.info/Os8vc
performing
a similar function
Understanding the Use, Misuse and Abuse of Safety
Selecting the appropriate SIL level must be done carefully.
Integrity Levels (2000). Felix Redmill Proceedings of the
Whole life costs are generally considerably higher in order to
Eighth Safety-critical Systems Symposium, Southampton
achieve higher SIL levels
This is because designing, testing
UK, February 2000. irse.infolljsow
and
maintaining systems to meet high levels of safety integrity
13
they
parts
Very