12
Robert Cooke, Mark Glover  
& Richard RobertsBack to basics:  
Metro train control  systems
In this month’s back to basics 
article, three of the team behind the new IRSE textbook, Metro Train Control Systems, introduce the underpinning principles that make train control for metro railways different to other types of railways. The article looks at some of the unique challenges that engineers working on this type of network face and identifies some of the solutions that tend to be used when current systems are installed or upgraded.
What is a metro?
Let’s start by considering what a metro 
is. Metro railways are also referred to by the generic term ‘mass transit’ and 
by more local terms such as ‘Tube’ 
or ‘Subway’. There are often major differences between systems in different 
parts of the world, but also a set of 
common challenges and approaches. The textbook explains:
“Metros differ from other railways in 
that they carry passengers only and run a more intense train service. They are concentrated in the world’s cities, providing travel both above and below 
ground for the people who live and 
work in them, as well as those who visit and commute to them. They range in size from a few kilometres in 
length, to those such as Tokyo, Beijing 
or New York that are measured in hundreds of route-kilometres. They move millions of people over relatively short distances, sometimes for twenty-
four hours per day.
“To do that successfully, the metro 
service needs to be reliable and resilient. Rail operations need to be organised, 
structured and integrated with other 
transport modes. Densely populated cities cannot function efficiently unless all modes of transport are 
carefully co-ordinated.”
What does that mean for the 
train control system?
On the face of it, metro signalling sounds 
simple compared to complex main line areas. The trains tend to move relatively 
slowly, perhaps up to 80 or 100km/h, 
they accelerate and brake quickly, and they tend to be of the same type and configuration (but not always!). That 
means they have the same, or at least 
very similar, characteristics in terms of acceleration, braking and top speed, the variables that most significantly influence design. There are no slow-moving 
freight trains to worry about, the railway 
Metros can be very varied in the way they look, the way they operate and the solutions adopted. 
From left to right, Beijing, Moscow and New York.
Photos Shutterstock/Markus Mainka/Volkova Natalia/Oneinchpunch.
 IRSE News |  Issue 296  |  February 2023
13
is nearly always operated as a fully 
vertically integrated business, there are few points, crossings and complicated 
junctions and there tend not to be 
connections to neighbouring railways.
However, a metro train will typically 
carry several hundred people, often 
up to 1000, crushed together in peak periods, at headways as low as 90s with dwell times of 45s at busy interchange stations through constrained 
infrastructure and crowded stations. 
Many lines will be moving between 20 000 and 50 000 people per hour per direction. Managing that many 
people, often in confined spaces, poses 
particular challenges, some of which we will discuss in this article.
It's true that the physics of trains are 
the same whether you’re moving at 
80km/h, 100km/h, 200km/h or even at 500km/h. Newton’s laws apply however, the parameters can differ, 
whether that's train resistance, motoring 
or braking acceleration or adhesion, or a combination of these. This leads to metros offering a different challenge to other railway systems.
So, all metro systems face the 
same challenges?
Whilst most metros face the challenges 
of moving large numbers of people safely through urban areas, several 
factors vary from city to city. Although 
in some cases, for example in China where there is rapid development of new urban railways, there can be a relatively 
similar approach for new-build city 
railways, that is not the case for most railways worldwide. Some metro systems have been operating for a very long time, for 
example London where parts of the 
Metropolitan line have followed the same route since the 1860s. Paris Metro began operation in 1900 and New York Subway in 1904. Clearly there have 
been multiple upgrades on each railway 
over the century, but culture, historical approaches and unique solutions to engineering problems have posed 
problems ever since. In many well-
established cities, it is not straightforward to dig new tunnels through existing congested sub-surface areas, as demonstrated by the recent Crossrail 
project in London.
One challenge comes from the 
infrastructure that current railway 
engineers have inherited. There are parts 
of the London Underground network where there are no station overruns at all, with trains having to stop safely immediately in front of an immoveable 
object such as a station concourse 
or even a redundant tunnel boring shield. Maintaining high performance running whilst ensuring that overruns that may cause significant human and 
material damage cannot occur is a 
significant challenge.
Whilst some metros operate entirely 
end-to-end within busy urban areas, 
others run multiple lines from different suburbs through common central sections. One example of this is the Oslo T-bane where there is a high capacity, 
low headway central section, served by 
trains running in from the outskirts of the city. Finding a viable solution that allows economic fitment and efficient 
operation on a railway where there is 
a 15-minute headway in places, but a two-minute headway in others requires detailed systems engineering.
Metros are complex systems of systems needing a range of solutions and interconnections. However when a railway is 
over 100 years old the challenges multiply. This photo shows cabling old and new and ancient disconnection boxes on 
London's Underground. Photo Pixabay/JLenio.
Holmenkollen station on Oslo Metro. Whilst service on this line is typically one train per 
direction every 15 minutes, trains on this route soon join the common central section with 
headways around two minutes. This station is also designed to handle extremely high 
passenger demand during winter sporting events. Photo Shutterstock/Markus Mainka.>>>
 IRSE News |  Issue 296  |  February 2023
14
Some of the busiest mass transit systems 
in the world can be found in areas where there are monsoon downfalls at varying 
intervals. One example is Singapore’s 
Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) system which has sections both in tunnel and on viaducts. 
Ensuring that adhesion is adequate 
to run at close train intervals in these exposed areas requires a clear understanding of the odometry used on 
the train to determine current speed and 
location and dynamic reduction of brake rates when low adhesion conditions are detected with rain detectors at stations. 
There are many other examples of 
railways that must deal with extreme weather conditions, be it extreme heat (for example Riyadh) or passing typhoons (for example Hong Kong 
or Taiwan), where the forces exerted 
by high winds can impact braking distances. Extreme weather has other impacts, such as forces on PSD (Platform 
Screen Doors), and trains which have 
to be considered for the platform-train gap, this can also be an outcome with tunnel ventilation forces if they are not considered correctly during design.
Do all metros have full train 
control systems?
Nearly all metros have full 
signalling systems. 
The vast majority also have at least 
a simple form of Automatic Train Protection (ATP), based on the use of mechanical or electronic trainstops that 
can cause a train to apply its brakes 
should it pass beyond a safe location. These are linked directly to trackside signals, and the design of the railway provides an overlap beyond each 
signal, the length of which is designed 
to emergency brake a train to rest within the overlap distance to prevent collisions with other trains/buffer stops 
or derailments at points. Where close 
stopping to buffer stops or trains is required speed control of the train on the approach is supervised by the ATP to reduce the required overlap distance. 
Since the 1960s metro railways have 
invested in technology to allow performance to be increased whilst 
maintaining safety. The provision of ATP 
has been combined with Automatic Train Operation (ATO) in many cases, allowing trains to be driven by on-board systems. This automation has allowed trains to 
be driven very close to the safe limits 
protected by the ATP, allowing optimum use of the capacity permitted by the infrastructure to be achieved.
From the 1990s onwards the state 
of technology had reached a point at which the first Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) systems 
could be introduced. Commonplace 
for new-build metro projects and upgrades, CBTC systems continuously update the position and speed of 
each train to determine the safe 
speed and distance at which they can travel at every point along the line to ensure the safe separation of trains. The communications medium of the 
earlier systems was typically inductive 
loop systems in the track, but today’s systems are typically based on radio communication. CBTC’s ability to 
provide constant updates not only allows trains to run closer together but also 
enhanced control of the running profile 
of each train and optimises the collective 
behaviour of the service. 
The efficient operation of a metro is 
dependent on the provision of a highly 
functional control centre system. Automation within these centres has again developed rapidly in recent decades, and these systems have 
been referred to as Automatic Train 
Supervision (ATS) since the 1960s, recognising the way that technology either enacts decisions or advises staff of 
the optimum choice that can be made. 
What is Automatic Train 
Supervision?
A modern metro cannot function 
effectively without ATS. As well as managing the signalling and train 
control systems, the ATS will typically 
have interfaces to other systems such as those for passenger information, maintenance management, Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) 
systems that control the traction power and station equipment, and now emerging as a requirement the Rail Enterprise Asset Management Systems 
(REAMS) used to optimise maintenance 
and asset replacement. With trains being automatically driven, the station to station run times are more predictable 
than when driven by human operators 
that have individual driving styles. With predictable and adjustable inter-station run-times the Automatic Train Regulation (ATR) function of the ATS can 
regulate the service to maintain/restore 
the timetable or desired headway.
Singapore's new NSEW lines control centre, home to high-performance  
ATS and SCADA systems.
 IRSE News |  Issue 296  |  February 2023
15
Is there an ETCS/CTCS type 
system for metros?
The lack of requirements for 
interoperability between metro railways, the variations between them, the way 
in which they have evolved and the 
fact that a limited number of train types operate on them has led to no common global standard being adopted 
to date. The current situation is that a 
small number of suppliers have created proprietary systems which most new or updated systems are based on with new line or upgraded line projects usually 
having a single system supplier. 
In most cases modifications are made 
to tailor the basic systems to the needs of the cities they are being delivered to. 
It is generally the case that the supplier 
of trackside equipment will also provide the onboard equipment necessary for ATP and ATO functionality, even if the 
trains themselves are not manufactured 
by them. This affects the procurement strategy for many authorities as they must decide to have a common system, 
a few preferred suppliers or a complete 
free market approach which could result in all lines having different systems (even from the same suppliers) and the long-term maintenance and obsolescence 
issues these create.
Common standards like ETCS bring 
commercial advantages to railway 
authorities, in particular the ability to 
be able to make comparisons between multiple suppliers when purchasing, and to be confident that if extensions or replacements are required, they can – at 
least to some extent – be procured from 
competing companies. The detailed definition of the air gap interface means that onboard equipment from one company can be expected (guaranteed?) to function properly with trackside 
equipment from other companies. 
Whilst initiatives such as the Urban 
Guided Transport Management System 
(UGTMS) specification and IEEE 
1474 series before that, have sought to make something approaching a standard, the greatest progress towards standardisation has been driven by some 
of the railways that are large enough 
to require it in their procurement processes. In Paris the Ouragan project and on New York Metro the Canarsie 
line project have aimed to create 
environments in which more than one supplier can deliver current and future systems based on common interfaces, but these are based on the specific 
needs of those cities. Other cities have 
ended up with de facto standards, for example on the London Underground one supplier has provided systems for 
all except one of the new railways or 
line upgrades of the past twenty years, despite competitive tendering.
What else is different  
about metros?
There are a wide range of interfaces 
that metro train control systems must deal with that main line railways 
typically don’t. 
On the trackside these can be as diverse 
as interlocking to flood gates or bomb 
blast doors that block tracks, they can 
also include detectors to ensure that big trains can’t be sent down small tunnels or a wide range of protection devices to allow track access for maintenance. For new underground metro systems, 
the ATS system regulates the number of 
trains permitted in a ventilation section to ensure smoke control strategies can move smoke away from passengers in the event of a fire. This is supported 
by the ATS providing train location 
information to the ventilation system SCADA so that the best ventilation and evacuation strategies can be presented 
to the operator. The ATS also manages 
train movements and authorities to react to fire detection, for example holding trains that have reported a potential fire on board at the next platform to facilitate 
evacuation and not dispatching trains 
towards fire incidents.
One of the most common systems 
that metro signalling systems have 
to interface with are Platform Screen Doors (PSDs) which provide positive segregation between trains and passengers within stations. These 
are used for environmental reasons, 
ensuring that station systems operate efficiently without trying to air condition tunnels, and for safety, allowing trains 
to enter stations at full line speed, 
if braking distances allow, whilst keeping passengers away from the track. Dwell times can be managed efficiently, providing another piece in 
the jigsaw of ensuring the delivery of the 
highest capacity.
PSDs have to interface with train and 
trackside equipment, ensuring that 
both train doors and PSD operation is synchronised to reduce the entrapment risk of passengers between the train and PSDs. There are various failure 
modes that need to be dealt with which 
increase the complexity of the interface. 
One of the most common systems that metro signalling systems have to interface with are 
Platform Screen Doors (PSDs). These half-height units are in Singapore.
>>>
 IRSE News |  Issue 296  |  February 2023
16
What does a typical metro 
signalling and train control system look like?
This section describes the typical 
architecture and subsystems of a CBTC metro train control system, as shown in 
the simplified block diagram in Figure 1. 
There are subtle differences between systems from different suppliers as delivered to different cities, but the basic 
functions remain the same, although 
in some cases they are delivered by different subsystems.
As in most signalling systems for any 
type of railway the heart of the system 
is one or more interlockings, or devices performing interlocking functionality. The interlocking may be combined with 
the ATP into a zone controller or work 
with a separate ATP system. Unlike main line systems that have equipment rooms and remote line side cabinets metros have restricted space in tunnels and with 
ATO provide a high-risk environment 
for maintainers so active trackside equipment is kept to a minimum. Metros can have a range of architectures with 
the most common being centralised or 
sectorised with sectors of two to three stations which minimises the impact of a sector failure.
The interlocking subsystem is 
responsible for the safe routing of trains to prevent collisions or derailments at junctions and for preventing trains from 
travelling in opposing directions on the same section of track. Interlockings 
are directly responsible for the safe 
operation of trains and so must be 
designed to Safety Integrity Level (SIL) 4. The interlockings react to commands from the ATS system to ensure that 
trains are routed in accordance with 
the timetable. 
Metro railways tend not to need so 
many trackside signals, especially for 
GoA3/4 systems where there is no train 
driver at the front of the train, instead they relay all necessary movement authority information directly to 
onboard computers, or to the cab if 
there is a driver.
The ATP subsystem determines the 
limit of movement authority for each 
train, which determines where the 
train is permitted to travel, based on the routes set by the interlocking and the position of trains within the route. 
The ATP determines the position of all 
trains using train position reports and/or interlocking train detection status. How this is done varies greatly from system to system. ATP subsystems also supervise 
train movements and ensure that they 
only occur on authorised routes, in the correct direction and within the limits of the movement authority. The 
ATP supervises the safety of all train 
movements whether train control is from the ATO or the train operator, and as a result the ATP is also designed to SIL 4. ATP equipment is situated trackside 
and on the train.ATO is the subsystem that drives the train 
between stations within the constraints 
established by the ATP subsystem. 
The functionality of the ATO will vary depending on the grade of automation – if the railway is fully automated the ATO 
will need to replace all the functions of 
the driver in normal operation, degraded, emergency and fault modes. Actions are either automated or remotely controlled from the control centre. The 
ATO replaces the train operator but 
one of the goals for automated systems is to eliminate the errors that humans introduce, so the ATO subsystem is 
typically defined as a SIL 2 system. 
Allocation of SIL to the subsystems has varying approaches, in that respect metros are no different to other railways, a balance is struck following 
the requirements and guidance from 
governing standards, but that outcome is not identical for what may appear to be the same system function.
ATP systems need to know both where 
the train is, and how fast it is moving, to a high degree of accuracy all the time. CBTC solutions are moving block 
systems where the available block length 
to the train ahead or other obstruction determines the maximum speed a train can travel and as the train ahead moves 
so does the available block. This means 
that safe operation is entirely dependent upon having this information available all the time so the decision not to apply the emergency brakes can be made. 
This is typically achieved by combining 
Beacon
Speed 
SensorsRadio
Event 
RecorderBeacon 
ReaderSignalPoint Switch
PSD
SCTATPCBIPSDC
Local ATS 
System
Emergency Vital 
Signalling 
Control PanelCentral ATS 
SystemEmergency 
Stop Plunger 
Overview 
Display of 
RailwayStaff 
Protection
Key Switch
Radio Antenna
SCTsRadioKey:
ATP Automatic Train Protection System
ATO Automatic Train Operation System
ATS Automatic Train Supervision System
CBI Computer Based Interlocking System
PSD Platform Screen Doors
PSDC Platform Screen Doors Controller
SCT Signalling Control Terminal
TDMS Train Data Management System
RadioFigure 1 – Simplified block diagram of a typical metro train control system.
 IRSE News |  Issue 296  |  February 2023
17
information from multiple systems 
such as a tachogenerator or speed probe determining how many times a 
wheel has rotated, a doppler radar or 
accelerometer to allow adjustments based on wheel slip or slide or changing wheel size, and absolute position 
references based on trackside beacons 
which are read by the train as it passes over them to assure location.
For modern CBTC systems there 
will be additional functionality that 
could be included as part of the ATO subsystem or by the provision of an additional processor unit. The Train Data 
Management System (TDMS) provides 
an interface between the signalling and train systems for functions that support train operation but are not directly involved with the train driving. This 
is especially true for fully automated 
trains that need to be told to ‘wake’ or ‘sleep’, configured for the correct mode of operation such as heating, 
air conditioning, lighting controls, 
closing dampers for train washing and the co-ordination of isolated doors for PSD operation.
Communication between the trackside 
and onboard systems is established over a trackside radio system providing a highly reliable link over which high 
integrity data can be transferred. 
There is a range of ways of making this happen, for example using highly directional antennas or ‘leaky feeder’ cables in tunnels or more conventional 
base stations in open air areas. Many 
systems use Wi-Fi in the ISM (Industrial, Scientific and Medical) bands but can also use 4G/5G, with cities in China mandating 4G as it is deemed less prone to interference. With IP based communications between sub-systems 
the CBTC can effectively be bearer 
agnostic if the required bandwidth and availability requirements can be met.
The ATS subsystem is responsible for the 
overall line control function, presenting the status of the railway to the operators, controlling trains and providing the operators with tools to both configure 
the timetable and the ability to intervene 
when the service deviates beyond the recovery capability of the ATS subsystem.
Grades of automation
As technology develops the level of automation of metros is rapidly increasing. The level of automation 
is generally measured by a railway’s 
Grade of Automation or GoA as illustrated in Figure 2. 
GoA2 railways retain a train operator in 
the cab but use computer systems to 
drive the train from location to location. ATP is required. In the event of ATO failure the driver can operate the train. 
An example would be the Central line 
of London Underground. GoA2 systems form most metro train control systems currently in service around the world.
GoA3 railways no longer need a full-time 
operator in the cab. Whilst there is still someone on the train who can operate it in the event of system failure, the train’s 
systems are entirely responsible for the 
operation of the train. The operator is freed up for passenger interaction. An example would be the Docklands Light 
Railway in London.Finally, GoA4 railways need no-one 
on the train. They have sufficient 
automation to fully manage the 
opening and closing of doors, making the decision to start, and dealing with the majority of failures that can occur. An example would be Line 14 of 
the Paris Metro.
GoA3 and GoA4 systems need to be 
designed with appropriate obstruction 
detection and mitigation – there isn’t 
an operator looking out of the front window to identify that the train is likely to hit, or has hit, an obstruction. This is straightforward for tunnels, but not so 
simple for metros operating at grade 
or on viaducts.
GoA4 railways require detailed systems 
engineering to establish and mitigate 
the risks associated with not having an operator. This may involve the use of PSDs to manage the platform interface, or having enhanced communication 
systems to allow control centre 
operators to talk directly to passengers when issues arise.
Some key requirements are redundancy 
of equipment to prevent stalled trains, critical alarm reporting from train to the control centre and passenger-initiated safe evacuation in tunnels. These are 
generally specific to individual metros.
It’s all about  
system engineering
The systems are typically well contained 
and there are rarely challenges like level crossings (although some metros 
do have them) or frequent trespass 
incidents, however this is balanced Grade of 
automationType of train operationSetting the train 
in motionStopping
the trainDoor
closureOperation in 
the event of 
disruption
4 Unattended Train Operation (UTO) Automatic Automatic Automatic Automatic
1ATP and Train Operator,
Non-automated Train Operation 
(NTO)Driver Driver Driver Driver
2ATP, ATO and Train Operator,
Semi Automatic Train Operation (STO)Automatic Driver Driver
3Attended, Driverless Train 
Operation (DTO)Automatic AutomaticT
rain
Attendant
0Operator only, 
On-sight Train Operation (TOS)Driver Driver Driver Driver
Automatic
Train
AttendantFigure 2 – Grades of automation and the differences between them.
>>>
 IRSE News |  Issue 296  |  February 2023
18
against the fact that metros are 
complex systems of systems. Each subsystem, for example ATP or ATO, 
are complex systems in their own right, 
but the overall solution involves myriad interfaces and interactions which need to be fully understood and managed 
if overall requirements, including 
safety and capacity, are to be met and proven to be met.
Systems engineering underpins the 
successful deployment of most metro 
signalling and train control projects, with the ‘V’ lifecycle clearly and accurately implemented throughout.
Reliability, Availability, Maintainability 
and Safety (RAMS) are evaluated in detail throughout metro projects (as explained in the article by Boyd 
McKillican in IRSE News January 2022, 
irse info/irsenews295). Reliability and maintainability directly drive availability (how much of the time the railway is 
available for service being based on how 
often individual parts go wrong and how long they take to fix), and safety in turn depends on the system operating as planned. With any mass transit system 
operating at high passenger loads, a 
stopped train can in itself be dangerous, particularly if traction power has to be removed and air conditioning/ventilation 
is no longer operative. SIL levels of the 
overall system need to be apportioned to subsystems to ensure the rate at which unsafe conditions could occur are clearly understood and managed. 
In the same way the impact of failure 
modes and their criticality needs to be established throughout the engineering phases of projects in order to ensure that 
the required levels are met, not just on 
opening day but throughout the service life which can typically be 20 to 25 years.
Modern metros are designed to deal 
with such incidents and the CBTC 
technology is considered when planning the line in terms of overruns and optimising safety and performance. Old systems are generally more of an ALARP (As Low as Reasonably Practicable) 
approach to get as safe as possible 
given the constraints. The term ALARP is subtlety different to SFAIRP (So Far As Is Reasonably Practical), ALARP 
and SFAIRP both have the concept of 
implementing hazard controls if practical and not grossly disproportionate to the benefit, however ALARP is presented as having a threshold, SFAIRP does not and 
forces evidence that possible, realistic 
and relevant hazard controls have been considered and included, unless they are grossly disproportionate to the benefit.
Computer simulation is widely used to 
ensure that the equipment provided delivers the performance necessary. This is the only realistic approach for 
CBTC systems to determine where the 
pinch points are as traditional signal to signal type headway calculations are not applicable when multiple trains 
can enter a route. This has been a 
science developed since the 1980s and is depended upon by railway authorities and suppliers alike now. For more information about how this 
works see the article on the topic 
in the May 2022 issue of IRSE News (irse.info/irsenews288).
System integration is also essential if 
multiple systems are to be brought together smoothly and all interfaces proven before delivering solutions on the railway. A strong example of this is 
the integration carried out for London’s 
Crossrail over the past couple of years. Full emulation, and later target hardware, of the three signalling solutions and two 
ATP solutions on the line were integrated 
in the lab with train carried systems and PSD control equipment to significantly de-risk the hugely complex project. Other railways take similar approaches, 
for example Singapore’s LTA mandates 
the use of offsite test track testing as well as building an integrated test track centre in Singapore, Melbourne has an Integrated Test lab (ITL). Test tracks are essential for modern complex CBTC 
systems to ensure that the signalling 
equipment is fully integrated and tested for all trains before delivery to the customer.
Delivering metro signalling and 
train control systems
In metro railways we refer to ‘greenfield’ 
and ‘brownfield’ sites. Greenfield systems are provided to new railways that are not 
currently in operation. These projects 
generally involve extended tested and trial operation phases during which the systems that were proved in the off-site 
integration phase are proved to operate 
as expected in real life situations. Whilst not straightforward for complex modern railways, this has the advantage of not impacting passenger services. This 
may require an additional temporary 
control centre to deal with the migration as a line will typically open in stages. Great care has to be taken during the 
migration testing to ensure that the 
stages under test do not affect those already in service.
Brownfield systems are upgrades 
of existing railways. In some (rare) 
cases it is possible to shut down the railway completely and carry out the engineering in the same way as for a 
greenfield site. However, reality is that 
if there is a business case to upgrade 
an existing railway it is likely to be an important transport artery, and closing 
it is not likely to be viable. Upgrades 
therefore often involve complex migration from old to new systems using ‘overlay’ or ‘underlay’ approaches 
that allow both old and new systems 
to co-exist for some time. This can be hugely complex in terms of managing train fleets, especially if the rolling stock is not being replaced at the time 
of the upgrade. There is rarely enough 
space on a train for two types of ATP/
London's Crossrail project, now operating as the Elizabeth line, made extensive use of integration 
facilities to enable the introduction of CBTC operation in a highly complex configuration.
 IRSE News |  Issue 296  |  February 2023
19
ATO equipment and their associated 
peripherals, and interfacing two systems 
to one train can be challenging. Space has to be found – or created – for 
example, under seats or in cubicles 
added in passenger carriages.
Migration in this manner can 
often take many years for any 
appreciable size of metro.
Maintaining metro signalling 
and train control systems
Keeping a metro system operational 
once it has been installed can also offer challenges. In most cases the foremost 
amongst these will be getting access 
to trackside equipment to carry out maintenance. Many city railways operate for 24 hours a day, most only have brief 
shutdowns of four to five hours per 
night. The time available for safe access is then further limited by the need to remove traction current and prove the railway safe – and the time necessary 
to ensure that after the work has been 
carried out, all plant and staff have safely left the railway. A few railways (e.g. parts of the New York Subway) have multiple 
lines which allow trains to keep running 
at a reduced level whilst work is being carried out, others support bidirectional working which fulfils the same function.
Obsolescence can also introduce further 
challenges. Metro signalling and train control solutions tend to be towards the higher technology end of the spectrum, 
largely due to the need to provide high-
capacity operation through the use of innovative techniques. The railways also tend to be early adopters of new ideas, for example some of the earliest 
uses of high integrity processor-based 
safety systems were on metros. Over the service life of a system (typically 20 years or more), this means supporting those 
technologies can require skills and tools 
that become harder to source. 
As an example of this many systems 
from the 1980s and 1990s made the use 
of microprocessors designed to support 
digital signal processing in a highly efficient way. As the decades passed and standard devices became powerful 
enough to remove the advantages 
of using special purpose chips, the knowledge of the programming languages and assembler code used to develop the original solutions faded, and 
emulators, compilers and test software 
became harder to source. In some cases, railways have even bought the rights to the masks for the processors in order 
to mitigate the risk of unavailability of 
key components.With the high development costs of new products suppliers are now starting to use generic hardware that can be configured for either main line 
or metro use, thus providing a larger 
user base which makes obsolescence management more cost effective with a smaller range of products.
People and skills
Whilst many of the skills necessary for metro signalling and train control are the same as on main line railways, 
the experience gained of delivering a 
particular type of system or meeting the needs of a particular railway can be hard to gain and maintain. There tends 
to be a migration around the world as 
those people with that specific metro knowledge are encouraged to move from city to city as major innovative projects are undertaken.
With processor-based systems it is much 
harder for authorities to fully understand the technology they are buying unless 
they set up their own labs such as RATP 
in Paris. Thus, the skills that could be gained by working on older relay-based systems are harder to obtain when accepting black box type systems with 
proprietary software. As an industry we 
need to ensure we are supporting the development of those skills and the underpinning knowledge for the decades 
to come. The importance of systems 
engineering, RAMS analysis, simulation and integration cannot be overstated, and the understanding of the particular needs of urban railways is important. 
Summary – and to find  
out more
In summary metro railways tend to have 
some common characteristics, but since they do not need to interoperate and 
some have been operating for over 100 
years, they have tended to evolve in isolation from one another. The result of this is a situation in which proprietary train control systems are procured and 
altered to meet the specific needs and 
expectations of different railways, and standardisation is limited.
There are many common elements to 
most solutions, and nearly all modern systems are based on CBTC technology with varying grades of automation. Development is rapid, particularly in 
Asia, with high rates of investment 
in sustainable, highly reliable, high-capacity public transport systems. Many of the skills necessary for deployment 
of these systems are common with all 
other types of railway engineering, but there are specific requirements around some techniques.
This is a fascinating and complex area of 
our industry, and one in which there is significant growth 
and opportunity. For more 
information the IRSE Metro Train 
Control Systems textbook is a unique body 
of knowledge. 
Written by many of the best engineers 
in this field 
worldwide and with contributions from railways across the planet, the textbook goes into detail about many of the 
subsystems and processes necessary for 
smooth deployment. It uses hundreds of illustrations, comprehensive case studies and introductions to several of 
the proprietary systems in use today. To 
order your copy visit irse.org/store
About the authors
Robert, Mark and Richard are all chartered engineers and have over 100 years' experience in metro signalling 
and train control between them! 
Robert worked for London Underground 
and Westinghouse Rail Systems in the 
UK before moving to Singapore. Rob 
is currently the deputy chief specialist (signalling) at the Land Transport Authority in Singapore, a member of the IRSE Council and the IRSE International 
Technical Committee. 
Mark has a background in metro 
signalling and train control, and 
experience in a wide range of mass transit and main line projects 
worldwide. He has been production manager of IRSE News since 2014, 
and is currently head of marketing and 
strategy support, Rail Infrastructure at Siemens Mobility in the UK.
Richard specialises in systems 
engineering for railway signalling in mass transit applications. He worked for Westinghouse Signals Limited, which became Invensys Rail and then Siemens 
Rail Automation, before moving to 
technology delivery in the operational domain with Metro Trains Melbourne as system architect for the Metro 
Tunnel Project.
Metro Train Control  
Systems
Metro Train Control SystemsMetro Train Control Systems is an essential reference and guide for the railway 
engineer seeking to understand the challenges to be met in developing signalling and train control systems for metro, or mass transit, railways. Metros are the lifeblood of modern cities and are essential to their economic growth. That growth demands ever-increasing train service levels of up to 36 trains per hour or beyond, with levels of automation to support such high reliability, from the attended to  the unattended, or driverless, train control system. 
This book, authored by a team of train control experts from across the world, 
aims to give the reader an understanding of metro railways. It outlines in detail the principles and applications of modern metro signalling, transitioning to  ‘moving block’ techniques and bringing the integrated Train Control System into focus. The design development is explained together with simulation techniques to optimise the train service frequency. The book makes extensive use of diagrams and photographs to bring the words to life and contains detailed presentations provided by the major signalling suppliers describing their own technical solutions. 
In this area of rapid development, Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) 
systems vary between suppliers to provide solutions tailored to meet operators’ specific needs in the metro environment. This is in contrast to the interoperable European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) specifications employed on main line operations, but there are nevertheless many commonalities that all modern train control or railway engineers need to consider in their roles. The book concludes with case studies from major transit authorities across the world.
Metro Train Control Systems is both a textbook and a reference book, making it an 
essential element of the knowledge library for the metro railway engineer.
The Institution of Railway Signal Engineers 
is the professional institution for all those engaged in or associated with railway signalling and telecommunications, train control, traffic management and allied professions.
Find out more at www.irse.org
Metro Train Control  
Systems
Metro Train Control SystemsMetro Train Control Systems is an essential reference and guide for the railway 
engineer seeking to understand the challenges to be met in developing signalling and train control systems for metro, or mass transit, railways. Metros are the lifeblood of modern cities and are essential to their economic growth. That growth demands ever-increasing train service levels of up to 36 trains per hour or beyond, with levels of automation to support such high reliability, from the attended to  the unattended, or driverless, train control system. 
This book, authored by a team of train control experts from across the world, 
aims to give the reader an understanding of metro railways. It outlines in detail the principles and applications of modern metro signalling, transitioning to  ‘moving block’ techniques and bringing the integrated Train Control System into focus. The design development is explained together with simulation techniques to optimise the train service frequency. The book makes extensive use of diagrams and photographs to bring the words to life and contains detailed presentations provided by the major signalling suppliers describing their own technical solutions. 
In this area of rapid development, Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) 
systems vary between suppliers to provide solutions tailored to meet operators’ specific needs in the metro environment. This is in contrast to the interoperable European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) specifications employed on main line operations, but there are nevertheless many commonalities that all modern train control or railway engineers need to consider in their roles. The book concludes with case studies from major transit authorities across the world.
Metro Train Control Systems is both a textbook and a reference book, making it an 
essential element of the knowledge library for the metro railway engineer.
The Institution of Railway Signal Engineers 
is the professional institution for all those engaged in or associated with railway signalling and telecommunications, train control, traffic management and allied professions.
Find out more at www.irse.org
Metro Train Control  
Systems
Metro Train Control SystemsMetro Train Control Systems is an essential reference and guide for the railway 
engineer seeking to understand the challenges to be met in developing signalling and train control systems for metro, or mass transit, railways. Metros are the lifeblood of modern cities and are essential to their economic growth. That growth demands ever-increasing train service levels of up to 36 trains per hour or beyond, with levels of automation to support such high reliability, from the attended to  the unattended, or driverless, train control system. 
This book, authored by a team of train control experts from across the world, 
aims to give the reader an understanding of metro railways. It outlines in detail the principles and applications of modern metro signalling, transitioning to  ‘moving block’ techniques and bringing the integrated Train Control System into focus. The design development is explained together with simulation techniques to optimise the train service frequency. The book makes extensive use of diagrams and photographs to bring the words to life and contains detailed presentations provided by the major signalling suppliers describing their own technical solutions. 
In this area of rapid development, Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) 
systems vary between suppliers to provide solutions tailored to meet operators’ specific needs in the metro environment. This is in contrast to the interoperable European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) specifications employed on main line operations, but there are nevertheless many commonalities that all modern train control or railway engineers need to consider in their roles. The book concludes with case studies from major transit authorities across the world.
Metro Train Control Systems is both a textbook and a reference book, making it an 
essential element of the knowledge library for the metro railway engineer.
The Institution of Railway Signal Engineers 
is the professional institution for all those engaged in or associated with railway signalling and telecommunications, train control, traffic management and allied professions.
Find out more at www.irse.org
Metro Train Control  
SystemsMetro Train Control Systems
Metro Train Control Systems is an essential reference and guide for the railway 
engineer seeking to understand the challenges to be met in developing signalling and train control systems for metro, or mass transit, railways. Metros are the lifeblood of modern cities and are essential to their economic growth. That growth demands ever-increasing train service levels of up to 36 trains per hour or beyond, with levels of automation to support such high reliability, from the attended to  the unattended, or driverless, train control system. 
This book, authored by a team of train control experts from across the world, 
aims to give the reader an understanding of metro railways. It outlines in detail the principles and applications of modern metro signalling, transitioning to  ‘moving block’ techniques and bringing the integrated Train Control System into focus. The design development is explained together with simulation techniques to optimise the train service frequency. The book makes extensive use of diagrams and photographs to bring the words to life and contains detailed presentations provided by the major signalling suppliers describing their own technical solutions. 
In this area of rapid development, Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) 
systems vary between suppliers to provide solutions tailored to meet operators’ specific needs in the metro environment. This is in contrast to the interoperable European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) specifications employed on main line operations, but there are nevertheless many commonalities that all modern train control or railway engineers need to consider in their roles. The book concludes with case studies from major transit authorities across the world.
Metro Train Control Systems is both a textbook and a reference book, making it an 
essential element of the knowledge library for the metro railway engineer.
The Institution of Railway Signal Engineers 
is the professional institution for all those engaged in or associated with railway signalling and telecommunications, train control, traffic management and allied professions.
Find out more at www.irse.org///