8
Francis HowBack to basics: signalsBack to basics
In this article in our “Back to basics” 
series we look at lineside railway 
signals. Signals are referred to frequently in other "Back to basics" articles, but without exploring the subject in detail.
Movement authorities
Trains and train drivers need to be 
provided with information telling them when to move, and where and when to 
stop. The generic term for information 
that permits a train to move onto a section of line is ‘movement authority’. Although railways vary enormously 
in how they operate, almost all rely 
on one of three means by which movement authority information is given to the train:
Verbal instructions given to the train 
driver to proceed to a designated location on the line ahead. The instruction is usually issued via a train 
radio system by a person in the control 
(dispatching) centre or similar location, such as a signal box. These types of systems are often used on low-capacity lines (sometimes referred to as ‘dark 
territory’) where a costly signalling 
system cannot be justified. For more information about these systems and their more modern equivalents, you 
should read Robert Baird’s Back to basics 
article on Low-Cost Electronic Authority Systems in issue 282 of IRSE News (November 2021) irse.info/irsenews282 
Railways also use verbal instructions to 
drivers when the normal lineside or cab signalling system has failed.Lineside signals (also called wayside signals), which comprise arrangements of visual symbols (coloured lights, 
mechanical devices, signs) positioned 
at pre-determined locations at the trackside for the driver to see and react to in the required manner. In the 
early days of railways lineside signals 
were mainly mechanically operated semaphores, and although many examples of such signalling can still be found around the world, all modern 
systems use colour light signals, which 
superficially look like road traffic lights/signals. This article focuses predominantly on lineside signals.
Cab signalling, where the movement 
authority information is displayed in the driving cab, rather than at the lineside. We will briefly consider cab signalling to 
understand how the provision of in-cab 
information compares with lineside signals. However, a full exploration of the topic, which includes systems 
such as Communications-Based Train 
Control (CBTC), the European Train Control System (ETCS) and Positive Train Control (PTC), is well beyond the scope 
of this article. 
So, we are talking mostly about lineside 
colour light signals, the information they convey, and how to ensure that train 
drivers can see the signals and respond 
to them appropriately. However, we are not going to explore all the types of signals used in different parts of the world – a whole book could be written 
about that! Nor are we discussing the 
decision-making technology which enables a signal to display movement authority information to a driver. That 
topic is covered in two Back to basics 
articles about Interlocking – see issues 265 and 266 of IRSE News (April and May 2020) irse.info/irsenews265 and irse.info/irsenews266 
Photo Pixabay/Didgeman.See page 36 for references to all the  
Back to basics articles published so far.
Signals such as these in Germany are an essential 
link in the chain of safety for most railways.
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
9
Why do railways need signals?
When you drive a road vehicle, you are 
‘driving on sight’. You are responsible for observing the road ahead and other 
nearby traffic and making decisions 
accordingly. You choose which route to take at junctions, maintain a safe distance from any vehicle you can 
see ahead of you, and you slow down 
when you see the need to do so. If you can see that a collision may be about to occur, you can try to take avoiding action by emergency braking and by 
steering the vehicle. Although traffic 
lights (road signals) are provided at some road junctions, most have no signals and safety is dependent solely on all drivers 
complying with a set of rules.
Railways are quite unlike roads. It is 
not possible to steer a train; it will go wherever the rails and points (switches) 
take it. A train cannot be stopped 
quickly; a passenger train travelling at 200km/h will have a typical braking distance of over 2.5km. So, except 
for very low speed railways such as 
tramways, driving a train is not a ‘drive on sight’ operation. To maintain safety in this very different operational environment, railway tracks are divided into ‘block’ sections, and 
normally only one train is allowed to be 
in each block section at any one time. A block section may be quite long (several kilometres), or very short (a couple of 
hundred metres or less, particularly on 
metros). Each block section may be plain line, or it may have points in the route; and in some cases trains may be permitted to travel through it in 
either direction. 
The driver of a train at the start of a 
block section may not be able to see 
all the track that comprises the section 
ahead. They cannot be sure whether points in the block section are set and locked correctly, nor know with certainty the movements of other trains already 
in (or approaching) the same block 
section. Because the driver cannot know if it is safe to proceed, a 'block' signal is positioned at the start of each block 
section to provide that information. 
An approaching train must stop at the signal unless it displays an indication to proceed. The signal is operated from the control centre via an interlocking, and it will display a proceed indication only when the block section is set and locked for the train, with no other conflicting 
train movements. The driver can then 
move the train through the block section to the signal that marks the start of the next section. If everything is working to 
plan (the timetable), train drivers should 
only infrequently encounter signals displaying ‘stop’, thereby minimising journey times and making maximum use of the line capacity.
Because a train takes a considerable 
distance to stop, a signal displaying ‘stop’ may not be visible to the driver at 
the location where they need to start 
slowing down. To ensure the driver is given adequate advance information and can brake appropriately, one or more ‘distant’ signals (also sometimes called 
'approach' signals) are provided on the 
approach to each signal that can display a stop indication. 
The distance from the first of these 
signals to the stop signal will be the longest braking distance (under normal adhesion conditions) of all the trains that are authorised to use the line, plus a 
D11 11 D13 13TrainBlock section
Braking distance Braking distanceDistant signal Distant signal Block signal Block signalProceed ProceedCaution, prepare to
stop at next signalStopFigure 1 – Examples of lineside signals in Switzerland (left), the UK (centre) and Germany (right).
Figure 2 – Block signals displaying 'proceed' (11) and 'stop' (13), with associated distant signals displaying 'proceed' (D11) and 'prepare to stop' (D13) indications.  
With acknowledgements to Jörn Pachl.
Photo Shutterstock/Lachlan1.
Photo Siemens Mobility.
>>>
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
10
margin for safety. If a signal is displaying 
stop, the preceding distant signal(s) will display appropriate ‘caution’ information 
to warn the driver of the need to slow 
down and be prepared to stop at a signal further ahead. If a signal is displaying ‘proceed’ (rather than stop) then the 
preceding distant signal(s) will display 
information to tell the driver that there is no need to slow down. These two scenarios are shown in Figure 2.
On routes where the traffic density is 
higher, every signal may be capable of displaying ‘proceed’, ‘caution, prepare to stop at next signal ahead’ and ‘stop’, and 
a block section is simply the portion of 
track between one signal and the next, equal in length to the braking distance (plus a margin). This is shown in Figure 3.
On very busy railways, the block sections 
may be made shorter than full braking distance to further improve capacity (by reducing the headway). In such 
cases, more than one preceding signal 
will display a ‘caution’ indication on the approach to a signal displaying stop, with full braking distance from the first of these signals to the stop 
signal – see Figure 4 for an example. 
The aspects of the signals at caution (9 and 11) are usually different from each other, to avoid misleading the driver as 
to which signal ahead is displaying a 
stop indication.Signal engineers, railway operators and train drivers use the word ‘aspect’ in association with signals, by which 
we mean all the information that is 
presented by a signal to the driver at a particular time, such as stop, proceed, and ‘caution, prepare to stop at a signal 
further ahead’. 
The aspects displayed by successive 
signals that a driver encounters is called an ‘aspect sequence’. 
How driving information is 
conveyed by lineside signals
In accordance with international 
technical standard UIC 732, most railways use the colour red for signals 
displaying a stop aspect (sometimes 
called a ‘danger’ aspect); green for ‘proceed’ (often called a ‘clear’ aspect); and yellow for ‘caution’ (sometimes 
called an ‘approach’ aspect). See Figure 5 
for an example of an aspect sequence using these colours.
A signal may also provide additional 
information for the driver, most 
importantly for diverging junctions where the train needs to slow down to traverse the points safely. There 
are basically two different ways in 
which this is done.Most of the world’s lineside signalled railways use ‘speed signalling systems’, 
whereby the signals tell a driver how fast 
to proceed on the approach to diverging junctions and, in some systems, when approaching a signal showing a stop 
aspect. However, there is generally little 
or no information provided about which route is set for the train at a junction.
By way of an example, the Dutch speed 
signalling system, which is based on 
USA practices, uses three basic aspects (red, yellow and green), supplemented where required by illuminated numeric 
indicators which tell the driver of a 
speed limit ahead; for instance, ‘8’ to indicate a maximum speed of 80km/h – see Figure 6.
Some other speed systems use 
combinations of colour lights to indicate speed limits, rather than displaying a number. For instance, the Italian 
national railway uses two lights displayed 
vertically (yellow over green) to warn the driver of the speed limit over a junction ahead that is set for the diverging route. In the example shown in Figure 7, the 
yellow/green aspect tells the driver 
that the junction ahead is set and must be traversed at a speed not exceeding 30km/h. For higher speed turnouts 
(60km/h and 100km/h), flashing yellow 
over green lights are used.
9 11 13TrainBlock section
Braking distance Braking distanceProceedCaution, prepare to
stop at next signalStopBlock section
9 11 13TrainBlock section
Braking distanceProceedCaution, prepare
to stop at next signalStopBlock section
7Caution, prepare to
stop two signals aheadBlock section
Braking distanceFigure 3 – Signal sequence with all signals capable of displaying 'proceed', 'prepare to stop' and 'stop' indications. With acknowledgements to Jörn Pachl.
Figure 4 – Signal sequence with 'prepare to stop two signals ahead'. 
With acknowledgements to Jörn Pachl.
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
11
Braking distance
Braking distance
Signal 9Signal 11Signal 13
30km/h
Although speed signalling predominates, 
some countries (including Britain and other countries that have systems based 
on British practice) use an alternative 
called ‘route signalling’. Information is provided at signals that protect diverging junctions to tell the driver which route is 
set for the train. The driver is expected to 
know the prevailing speed for the route set, and when to start braking to traverse the junction safely. The signals provide no information about speed limits 
over junctions. 
The route information may take the form 
of a junction indicator (a ‘bar’ of white 
lights set at an angle corresponding to 
the route set, usually mounted above the main signal, see the centre photo in Figure 1); or an illuminated alphanumeric character may be displayed above or 
alongside the main signal to indicate the 
route set; or, less commonly, a pair of signals may be provided alongside each other, one for the straight route and one 
for the diverging route. The one for the 
route set displays the appropriate aspect to allow the train to proceed over the junction, while the other remains at red. 
To reduce the risk of a driver 
inadvertently traversing a diverging junction too fast on a route-signalled railway, which could result in derailment, ‘approach release’ (also known as ‘approach control’) of junction signals 
is employed. This typically involves 
holding the junction signal at ‘stop’ with the preceding signal(s) displaying the corresponding caution aspect(s) until 
the train has slowed and the driver can 
clearly see the junction signal ahead, at which point the interlocking allows the signal to display the appropriate aspect and route indication for the train 
to proceed over the junction. At some 
high-speed junctions in Britain the junction signal may initially be held at ‘caution’ (single yellow) with the junction 
indicator displayed, and the preceding 
signal(s) display flashing yellow aspects to warn of the need to slow down for the diverging route. 
Although signalling systems can be 
classified broadly as ‘route’ or ‘speed’ in type, some speed signalling systems include some features of route 
signalling, and to a limited extent vice-
versa. For example, the Italian speed system referred to earlier includes both speed and (limited) route information in the signal aspects on the approach to 
a diverging junction. Furthermore, not 
only do some countries have more than one type of speed or route signalling, a few (notably the USA and Australia) use route signalling on some railways and speed signalling on others. Wikipedia 
provides a useful summary of the signal 
aspects used in various Australian states. irse.info/idkn9
Fixed lineside speed reminder signs may 
be provided with both route and speed systems. This is arguably more important with route signalling than speed signalling, although it in no way replaces 
or lessens the need for route knowledge. 
The IRSE’s textbook “European Railway 
Signalling” provides information about 
the many different systems of signal 
aspects used by European railway administrations. It illustrates well just how much they vary from one country to another. 
The driver’s perspective
Having considered the information provided by lineside signals to drive a train safely, we will now think about how 
to ensure that each signal displays the 
information in a manner that drivers can assimilate and use.
Good practice for signal visibility is 
based on the needs of the driver. On approaching a signal, a driver has Figure 5 – A typical sequence of successive signals corresponding to 
Figure 3, displaying 'proceed', 'caution, prepare to stop at next signal 
ahead' and 'stop' (green, yellow and red respectively).Figure 6 – An example of a Netherlands railway signal,  
instructing the driver to reduce speed to 80km/h before  
reaching the next signal ahead.
Figure 7 – An example of Italian speed signalling, where the diverging route is set and must be traversed at no more than 30km/h. The red over green (proceed) aspect displayed by the junction signal confirms to the driver 
that the diverging route is set and that the next signal ahead is also displaying a proceed aspect.
>>>
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
12
firstly to read the signal (observe the 
information displayed), then interpret the aspect (understand what it means), and 
then drive the train accordingly.
Reading a signal requires that:
1. It is clearly applicable to the driver 
of an approaching train, and readily 
distinguishable from any other signals in the vicinity (for instance, other 
adjacent signals, and signals further 
ahead on the line).
2. All the illumina ted lights that 
comprise the aspect displayed are clearly visible for a sufficient length of time for the driver to observe 
the aspect, taking into account the 
highest attainable or permissible approach speed.
3. It is visible under all conditions 
and at all times of day and night, including those where sunlight or nearby artificial lighting might make 
readability difficult.Interpreting a signal requires that:
1. The aspect displayed is one o f an 
established set of aspects applicable 
to the railway, with a clearly defined meaning for drivers. 
2. The in formation conveyed by the 
aspect is unambiguous, so that the driver is not placed in a position of uncertainty as to what action to take; 
nor be ‘conditioned’ by previous 
driving experience to expect to take a particular course of action, only to find on rare occasions that a different 
action is required even though the 
aspect displayed is the same.
3. The aspect is not corrupted (all 
relevant lights illuminated, and no others), to avoid the driver either not understanding the information 
presented or interpreting it as having 
a different meaning to that intended by the signalling system.When the driver has read and interpreted a signal, they then decide on what action to take, making use of their knowledge 
of the rolling stock, the route ahead and 
the applicable operational rules.
Driveability of the signal requires that:
1. The aspect f orms part of a logical 
aspect sequence encountered by the 
driver, except of course in emergency or failure conditions, for instance if 
a signal reverts to red to stop a train 
because of an unexpected unsafe condition ahead.
2. Wher e the aspect requires the 
driver to reduce speed, it must be possible to meet the speed reduction requirement by means of normal 
(service) braking, taking into account 
factors such as the maximum attainable/permissible speed on the approach to the signal, rolling stock 
performance and braking capability, 
gradients and distance to next signal.
Train drivers need a wide range of information to do their 
job, of which signals are only one part. The information and knowledge they require includes:
• Route and infrastructure information (commonly known as ‘route knowledge’), including the locations (and layouts) of junctions, stations, lineside signals, permitted 
speeds and gradients. This information is relatively 
static, with occasional changes when the infrastructure manager alters track layouts and signalling.
• Rolling stock information, including the train’s maximum speed, braking capability and length. This information is particular to each type of train, and some of it (such 
as length and braking capability), may be particular to 
each individual train trip – particularly in the case of freight trains.
• Timetable information, telling the driver about planned departure, passing and arrival times at specific locations. • Driving rules for driving the train safely under normal operational conditions, in degraded modes and in 
emergency situations; and for activities such as those 
associated with arrival/departure from stations (passenger 
trains) and loading/unloading operations (freight trains).
• Movement authorities. The driver must know the meaning of the information displayed by lineside signals (or the in-cab display), and how to respond to 
that information.
In the case of a metro, the operation of all the trains using 
any one line is more or less identical and driving is a relatively straightforward task, particularly if the trains are fitted with automatic train protection and operation (ATP, ATO). At the other extreme, the manual driving of long and heavy freight 
trains, where each one may have different characteristics, is 
much more complex.The knowledge and information required for train driving
Figure 8 – A lineside signal in Japan, indicating a route set to the right at a diverging junction. 
Japan predominantly uses speed signalling, but with route signalling at junctions.
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
13
3. The in formation displayed is of fairly 
immediate relevance to the driver. 
Displaying information well before the driver needs to act on it could 
risk them forgetting it by the time it 
becomes relevant. 
Two important corollaries to these requirements are firstly that drivers must meet the relevant eyesight (colour vision and visual acuity) and competence 
requirements; and secondly that driving 
cabs should be designed to provide the driver with an optimal view of lineside signals, not only from a distance but also 
when close to, or stationary at, a signal.
Positioning signals
It should be clear by now that designing 
a lineside signalling system requires careful consideration of the train drivers’ 
needs. In particular, the locations 
of signals for optimum viewing and correct driver response are of critical importance. The locations are initially 
determined by headway and signal 
spacing calculations, taking account of the topography of the railway infrastructure (including track layout, gradients and speed limits), operational 
requirements, the rolling stock that 
will use the railway, and capacity requirements. Other factors may also need to be considered, such as:
• Line curvature and structures (such as bridges, station infrastructure and overhead line equipment) that may 
impede signal visibility.• Viaducts and tunnels, where it is 
inadvisable to place signals unless unavoidable because of the risks 
associated with evacuating a train 
in an emergency.
• Nearby artificial lighting (on stations, buildings and roads) which could impair the clarity with which 
signals can be seen.
• The effects of sunlight (shining 
either into the signal or into the driver’s eyes).
• The possible consequences of a train passing the signal at danger (stop) – commonly known in Britain 
and some other countries as a SPAD 
(Signal Passed At Danger’).
The proposed location and light beam alignment of each signal is usually subject to review to ensure that in practice a driver will be able to read the 
signal aspect reliably and accurately, and 
that there are no unforeseen hazards associated with the location. 
This review process, which may involve 
site visits and/or the use of simulation 
systems, is known as ‘signal sighting’ (in Britain, at least), and is a joint activity involving signalling designers and train 
operators. Signal maintainers may also 
participate so that maintainability issues can be considered and addressed.
Where the time for which a signal is 
visible to a driver is unacceptably short 
(for example, because of tight curvature on the approach) and it is not possible 
to place the signal in a better location, 
repeater signals are sometimes used, located a short distance before the main signal. As their name implies, they repeat 
some or all of the information displayed 
by the main signal to give the driver an extended time to read and interpret the aspect. It should be noted that if the signal is displaying ‘stop’, the driver 
is expected to stop at the main signal, 
not the repeater.
Countdown marker boards are also 
sometimes provided on the approach 
to signals to aid the driver. On some railways this is done routinely; on others it is done only in special circumstances, for instance where the signal 
sighting time is poor.
Most railways have conventions about 
whether signals are located to the left or 
the right of the track, usually dependent 
on whether, on double track lines, trains are normally on the right-hand or left-hand track in the direction of running. 
Main signals are usually positioned at 
or above driver’s eye level, on either posts (masts), cantilever structures or gantries. The latter two are used mostly 
on busy routes with several parallel lines 
where there may not be room to place individual signal posts between the tracks, see Figure 9.
Figure 9 – Signal structures in the USA, with signals on a cantilever structure above the main running lines.  
To the right is a signal on a post for trains exiting the loop line.
Photo Shutterstock/Pat Folsem.
>>>
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
14
On some railways, notably underground 
metros, there may be insufficient room to place signals in locations that are 
clear of the swept envelope of the train. 
In such cases, smaller signal heads might be used and/or they might be positioned near ground level instead 
of being elevated, where there is 
more room for them.
Lastly on the subject of signal positions, 
each signal may be assigned an 
alphanumeric identity that is unique 
within the area of the control centre. Typically the identity is shown on a plate attached to the signal structure, 
and on the signalling display system 
in the control centre. If a driver and signaller need to speak with each other (by radio or phone) when a train is stationary at a signal, the identity is 
used to verify the train's location. This is 
vital for safety, particularly if the signal is displaying 'stop' because of a failure and the driver has to be given verbal 
instructions to proceed.
Signal head design
Signal heads have many different 
designs. The predominant form is a metal structure within which are 
separate lamp (bulb) and lens assemblies 
for each coloured light that the signal requires. Each assembly has an electrical connection to the signalling system 
which switches the lamp on or off.
Some railways use lamp and lens 
assemblies that allow multiple colours to be displayed through a single lens, rather 
than having a separate assembly for each 
colour. The so-called ‘searchlight’ signal (an electromechanical device) is one example of this. Other types use dichroic 
mirrors or colour LEDs.
The filament (incandescent) lamps 
traditionally used for signals are generally low power devices (typically 24W or less) 
specifically designed for the purpose, 
in front of which is a lens system, see Figure 10. This arrangement produces a very concentrated beam of light that is visible as much as a kilometre away in 
good conditions, with a narrow angle 
of divergence to help ensure that the signal can be seen predominantly by drivers on the line to which it applies 
but less so by drivers on other (parallel) 
lines. Lens systems can also be wide-angled when necessary to aid viewing in special circumstances, such as when approaching on a sharp curve.
LED technology has led to a revolution 
in railway signals, enabling heads to be much more compact, lighter and 
reliable, with a less complex lens system, 
whilst still meeting the requirement to produce a concentrated beam of light with beam intensities suitable for long, medium or short-range viewing. 
For these reasons many railways 
now use LED signals in preference to filament lamp types for signalling schemes and renewals.
Although the visibility of a signal from 
a distance is of prime importance, a driver also needs to be able to see the aspect displayed when stopped close 
to the signal. Various techniques are 
used to ensure this, including a specially designed part of the lens which shines light down towards the driving cab; using small repeater (or co-acting) 
signals at cab height for close-up 
viewing; and requiring drivers to stop a few metres before the signal, where it is 
clearly visible to them.
The visibility of signals can be 
problematical in locations where at some times of the day and year the sun is either shining directly into the signal 
or is shining directly behind it. Signals 
are usually equipped with hoods to reduce the problem, and lenses are designed so far as possible to minimise 
the reflection of sunlight, which could 
otherwise produce so called ‘phantom aspects’ where the lamp appears to be alight but is not.
Signals must be highly reliable, for 
both safety and train performance reasons. On many railways, failure of a signal light is considered sufficiently 
hazardous that the signalling system 
has built-in mitigations to minimise the risk of a driver encountering an un-illuminated (‘black’ or ‘dark’) signal. Typical arrangements include double filament lamps, one being the 
standby for the other; proving within 
the signalling system that the signal ahead is alight before a driver is given a movement authority towards it; and 
restricting aspects and their sequences 
so that drivers only encounter correctly illuminated signals. Railways’ operating rules usually state that in the unlikely event of a driver encountering an 
un-illuminated signal, they should treat 
it as displaying ‘stop’.
The use of LEDs in signals has made the 
sudden failure of a light very infrequent 
compared with filament lamps. Each light typically comprises a matrix of multiple LEDs and therefore a single LED 
failure only marginally degrades visibility.
Maintenance considerations
Signals need to be maintained, which 
may include cleaning the lenses, replacing failed lamps, and periodically 
checking beam alignment and 
lamp voltages. 
Safe access for maintenance staff is 
therefore an important consideration 
in the design of signal structures and, to some extent, in their positioning as well (although the needs of the driver take precedence). Signals are usually 
equipped with ladders for access, 
although some modern lightweight single post structures have a fold-down arrangement so that the signal can be 
lowered to the ground for maintenance. 
Cantilever and gantry structures are sometimes used in preference to Lamp (bulb)
Main filament at focal point
Clear 
outer lensColoured
inner lensFigure 10 – A cutaway side view of a typical filament lamp lens system.
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
15
single posts to facilitate access for 
maintenance purposes without requiring staff to cross the tracks, a walkway for 
maintainers being an integral part of 
the structure. 
Some signals use optical fibres to 
transmit the light to the signal head, 
allowing the lamp unit to be placed closer to ground level to make maintenance easier and allowing the 
signal head to be mounted on a simpler 
structure, or even on the overhead electrification supports if space and visibility requirements permit.
Signals for low ‑speed 
movements
So far, we have only discussed the main signals used for running movements, where a train is travelling at speed 
from A to B. Railways must also make 
provision for a variety of other train movements, for which distinctly different signals are generally used. These 
movements include:
• Shunting into and out of sidings. 
Such movements may be in the opposite direction to the 
normal traffic flow.
• Detaching/attaching locomotives 
and wagons from/to trains.
• Enabling a train to enter a section of line already occupied by another train, for instance where a platform is 
to be shared by two trains or where 
two trains are to be joined together.
• Moving a train over a crossover from one line to another so that it can reverse direction and travel back on 
the other line.The signals used for these purposes are 
generally known as shunting or position light signals, although when associated 
with a main signal (i.e., attached to the 
same structure) they are sometimes called subsidiary signals. The colour red is commonly used to denote stop, 
and authority to proceed is indicated 
by white or yellow lights (often in pairs), see Figure 11. This is not universal practice however, and railways use many different forms. The USA, for instance, 
has several types of position light signals 
(and, incidentally, main signal aspects as well), their existence being due to the varied historical development of the 
railroad companies.
Because shunting signals are used only 
for low-speed movements, they are not designed to be visible over great 
distances, nor is there any need for 
aspect sequences to warn drivers to slow down when approaching a shunt signal displaying stop. The signals are generally 
located close to ground level, except 
where they are associated with a main signal, when they are mounted alongside or immediately below the main head.
Tramways (streetcar systems) also 
generally operate at low speeds and braking distances are sufficiently short that a tram (streetcar) can be brought 
to a stand when the driver sees a signal 
displaying stop, without the need for ‘distant’ signals. Signals are provided to indicate when and where to stop at intersections with roads and other 
tram lines (including entry to single line 
sections), and they may also indicate which route is set. Tramway signals take many different forms, and streets both intersect tram tracks and share the same space. It is 
therefore important to ensure that signs, 
road markings and signals for trams are distinct and different from those applicable to motorists and pedestrians. 
Both motorists and tram drivers need to 
be aware of signals applicable to them, and to some extent also understand the meaning of those which apply to the other mode of transport, see Figure 12.
How train warning and 
protection systems help drivers to obey lineside signals
A separate “Back to Basics” article deals 
with the subject of train protection systems, and it is not the intention to 
go into the details of such systems 
here. However, it is worth mentioning the role of both warning systems and protection systems in the context of 
lineside signalling.
Train-borne warning systems alert 
the driver to take note of information presented by lineside signals, and they 
may initiate braking if the driver fails 
to acknowledge the warning. After acknowledgement, the train is usually solely under driver control. 
Train-borne protection systems monitor 
the speed of the train and cause a brake application if the train is being driven outside safe limits. Some, such as train-
stops, intervene to apply the brakes if 
a train passes a signal at danger (stop) but without providing a visual or audible warning before doing so. At the opposite 
end of the spectrum, continuous 
Figure 11 – An example of a shunting signal. This one is in Great 
Britain; the appearance and aspects of shunting signals vary widely  
on different railways.
Photo Paul Darlington.
Figure 12 – Two tram and two bus signals on a single supporting 
structure in Germany. 
Photo Wikimedia/PaulT, under GNU licence.
>>>
 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
16
Automatic Train Protection systems (ATP) 
provide comprehensive information about the speed profile that the driver 
should be following, warn the driver of 
over-speeding, and intervene to slow the train down if the train speed is not reduced appropriately.
Warning and protection systems that 
are provided in conjunction with lineside signals can assist the driver in several ways:
1. They can help maintain the driver’s 
vigilance by providing in-cab visual/audible indications or warnings on the approach to each signal, 
repeating some of the information 
provided by the signal.
2. They can pr ovide an in-cab reminder 
of the aspect or information displayed by a signal after the driver has passed it.
3. They can aid the driver in observing 
signals in conditions of poor visibility, such as fog.
4. They can intervene to slow the train 
down if the system judges that the train speed is too high.
Cab signalling
Before we go further, note that trains which are driven using Automatic Train Operation (ATO) are not part of this 
discussion, nor are we considering Driver 
Advisory Systems (DAS), which assist the driver in driving optimally (better time-keeping and energy-efficient driving) but 
are not a substitute for lineside signals. 
See ITC Report 44 for more information about DAS. irse.info/itc44
Cab signalling may be provided for 
various reasons, including better 
operational performance, improved safety and reduced costs. Bob Barnard’s article “What can cab signalling ever do for us?” in issue 239 of IRSE News (December 2017) irse.info/irsenews239 provides an excellent broader perspective on the challenges and 
benefits of cab signalling.
Modern cab signalling systems 
provide comprehensive in-cab driving 
information for the driver to operate 
the train safely and optimally without the need for lineside signals (even if they are still provided for unfitted rolling stock). On lines without signals, lineside 
signs (marker boards) may be provided 
to tell the driver precisely where to stop the front of the train at the end of a movement authority, but apart from 
that almost all the information the driver 
requires is available via the cab display (see Figure 13). 
The display is often called a driver-
machine interface (DMI), but we will 
continue to use the term 'cab display' in this article.
Most cab signalling systems include 
ATP which, as we have already noted, monitors the driver’s actions and intervenes if the train exceeds the maximum safe speed. Under normal 
circumstances the driver is in full control 
of the train. Even if the system warns them that the train is travelling too fast, the driver remains in control unless they 
fail to heed the warning and slow down. 
Like lineside signals, the cab display must be readable, interpretable and driveable.
Readability of the cab 
display means that:
1. It must be easily visible by the driver 
from their normal position in the 
cab, even under difficult lighting conditions such as bright sunlight.
2. W arnings and other important ‘alert’ 
information must be particularly prominent and supported by clear and distinguishable audible warnings.Interpretability of the cab display means that:
1. The in formation displayed must be 
clear, unambiguous and consistent with any other information that may be available to the driver 
(whether in the cab or by lineside 
signals and signs).
2. The in formation must make sense 
to the driver without the need for mental computations or geo-spatial interpretation.
Driveability requires that:
1. In formation must be provided to 
enable the train to be driven safely, including, for example, current and upcoming speed limits/profiles, 
the distance to the next stopping 
position, gradients and other relevant driving information. 
2. In formation must be provided on a 
timely basis, so that the driver does not need to take abnormal action (such as emergency braking) to 
comply with it.
3. In formation that requires the driver 
to take action (either immediately or 
later) must remain displayed for as long as it is relevant. 
4. The system must be designed so tha t 
the driver can control the train speed without the system intervening – provided of course that they comply 
with speed limits and do not pass 
the end of any movement authority. Where a system intervention may become necessary (for instance, due 
to over-speeding), it should normally 
be preceded by a warning so that the driver can take the appropriate corrective action.
Most cab signalling systems are designed on the ‘head up’ principle. In other 
words, the driver looks out of the cab 
window at the track ahead most of the 
Figure 13 – Typical cab display for ETCS (left) and a CBTC system (right).

 IRSE News |  Issue 304  |  November 2023
17
time, glancing at the display only when 
necessary. This is particularly important 
on railways where it is possible that an obstruction could arise on the line 
ahead – although of course there is 
no guarantee that the driver could take action to prevent a collision. The ‘head up’ principle makes it doubly 
important that the in-cab system, and 
the display in particular, is designed to facilitate this driving style, for instance by providing audible alerts when new information is displayed that requires a 
response by the driver.
Cab displays are usually interactive, 
requiring the driver to input information 
(for example, at the start of a journey, 
or when changing the driving mode, or to acknowledge warnings). Other information, such as the speedometer, may also be integrated into the display. 
Ergonomic factors are therefore 
important in the design of the display and associated input keys.
Closing remarks
In this article we have attempted to present a broad picture of lineside colour light signals, their purposes, and their 
variations. We have explained the most 
commonly used aspects, the differences between speed and route signalling, and the importance of meeting the driver’s need for signals to be readable, interpretable and driveable. 
We have considered how train 
protection and warning systems support the driving task in lineside signalled 
territory. Finally, we have acknowledged 
that, although full cab signalling (with ATP) removes many of the issues associated with lineside signals, the need to make the information displayed in the 
cab readable, interpretable and driveable 
remains important.
If you are new to railway signalling, we 
recommend that you learn more about 
the lineside signals that are used on railways with which you are familiar. What aspects and aspect sequences are used? How are diverging junctions 
signalled? How well do the signals 
meet the needs of drivers, as set out in this article?
You might also investigate types of 
signals that have not been mentioned – for instance, special signals used to authorise a train to depart from a platform when it is ready to leave; or 
situations where fixed lineside signs are 
used instead of colour light signals; or signals used in conjunction with some types of level (grade) crossings.The contributions of others to the production of this article are acknowledged, with thanks in particular 
to Robert Baird, Richard Barrow, 
Hugh Barton, Wim Coenraad, Piers Connor, David Fenner, Mark Glover,  
Ian Mitchell and Allan Neilson.
A rainy day in Glasgow, but good sighting and modern signals 
give drivers a clear indication of their movement authority. 
About the author
Francis has been a long time member of the IRSE. His career has seen him work for British 
Rail/Railtrack, Atkins, the Railway 
Industry Association and finally as chief executive of the IRSE before his retirement.
Francis was an IRSE Exam 
Thorrowgood Scholar and served on Council for many years, becoming president in 2012-2013.
He has previously written 
"Back to basics" articles on interlockings and points.///
If you found this article useful we're sure you will 
enjoy other Back to basics articles, including:
Interlockings
Francis How
Part 1 April 2020 irse.info/irsenews265  
Part 2 May 2020 irse.info/irsenews266Points
Francis How
Part 1 February 2022 irse.info/irsenews285 
Part 2 March 2022 irse.info/irsenews286 Train protection
David Fenner
July 2020 irse.info/irsenews268