 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 1 of 13 
Signalling the Layout  
Nari Bandi  (partly based on the former module 2 study guide)  
Essential reading text for students of the IRSE Certificate in Railway Control 
Engineering Fundamentals (Module A) from October 2025 exam  
 
Railways require signalling because many trains need to use the same tracks , drivers of trains cannot 
“steer around” other trains or obstructions, and the braking distance of a train is greater than the 
distance that the driver can see. The signalling must also deliver the train capacity required for the line. 
Therefore, the signalling of the track layout is critical.  
 
1. Purpose of Signalling and Functions 
The key purposes of a signalling system are listed below.  These include c ertain functions which were in 
the past managed largely or entirely by procedur e, but are now generally regarded as essential 
functions of the technical signalling system .   
 Set up a safe route for the passage of each train over the track that it is to traverse.  
 Authorise the train to make the movement.  
 Maintain the route while the train is making its movement.  
 Supervise and/or enforce the train to stay within its movement authority.  
 Release the route (for use by other trains) after the passage of the train”.  
Functions have been further added which may include:  
• The train driver (or ATO system) should be provided with appropriate information to control the train.  
• Sufficient space should be provided between following trains to allow each train to brake to a 
stand safely.  
• Controls should be in place to prevent or mitigate the consequences of:  
 Trains passing the end point of their movement authority.  
 Trains exceeding the maximum permitted speed.  
 Trains moving without authorisation.  
• Protection should be provided for the public and trains at level (grade) crossing s. 
• The means should be provided for protecting trains, worksites, and workers during engineering 
works.  
• The signaller should be provided with appropriate information to enable the safe authorisation of train movements.  
• The system should have facilities to communicate between the signaller and others.  
• Means should be provided to prevent trains being signalled onto lines with which they are 
incompatible.  
• Facilities should be provided to instruct a train to stop in an emergency.  
 
2. Movement Authority  
• A Movement Authority (MA) is an authority communicated to the driver (or to the ATO system 
driving the train)  by the signalling system after it has checked that the section of line is clear 
and secure.  This grants permission for a train to enter a particular section of 
line. Communication to the driver may be by means of lineside signals, or via an in- cab display 
(or sometimes both).  
• A MA will have some limits associated with it, which may be:    
 Speed at which the movement may proceed.  
(“Speed” signalling systems favoured in many parts of continental Europe)     
 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 2 of 13 
 Route and Distance to the end of the movement authority.  
(“Route” signalling systems – favoured in the UK and parts of the world historically 
closely associated).   
• Traditionally a movement authority is communicated to a driver by means of a lineside signal 
displaying a “proceed” aspect with the end of a movement authority indicated by a red lineside 
signal aspect .    
• The nature of the “proceed” aspect provides information about the limitations associated with 
the movement authority.  (“Speed” signalling or “Route” signalling).  Except where the driver can 
always see the end of movement authority from at least the braking distance (slow speeds and good braking, start from rest) some form of restrictive (cautionary) aspect is necessary.  
• Certain MAs permit a train to enter a section of line that is already occupied by another train to allow trains to join, or to share platforms.  The communication of these MAs to the driver includes the fact that the line ahead is occupied. Otherwise train separation is important , see 
section 3.  
 
3. Train Separation 
To avoid collisions, it is essential to maintain a safe distance between trains.  The most common methods are described below.  
3.1 On-sight train control   
On tramways and on certain railways there is little benefit in providing a comprehensive signalling 
system . Rail traffic speeds, frequency, and braking performance may be such that safe operation can 
rely on the driver being able to observe that the track ahead is clear.  
3.2 Fixed block working 
Railway lines are divided into “block sections” and in general only one train is permitted to occupy that 
section of line at  any one time.  On low density lines a block section might be tens of kilometres, 
whereas at the other extreme,  on a very high- density metro line, a block section might be much less 
than the length of a train.  
One exception is that c ertain MAs permit a train to enter a section of line that is already occupied by 
another train to allow trains to join, or to share platforms  and sidings .  
 
Lineside signals usually define the start and end of a block section and provide authority to enter the 
section. Towards the end of a movement authority, lineside signals specify where to stop and also give adequate prior warning of this.  Where signals are not provided, the movement authority and the 
remaining distance to its limit is given via some kind of in- cab display and/or an ATO (automatic train 
operation) system , or by a verbal instruction.  The following safe separation methods are based on fixed 
block working . For new projects, Absolute Block Working has been largely superseded by Track Circuit 
Block working , which is now evolving into ETCS.   
• Absolute Block working:  The signallers at the entrance and exit of the block section must follow 
a strict procedure to authorise a train to enter the block section and to confirm that the complete train has left it (e.g. by observing the tail lamp on the back of the train). The length of block 
sections is dependent on spacing between signal boxes , which is often dictated by the distances 
between junctions , stations  or level crossings . In most installations, electric block instruments are 
used .  Typically, these are interlocked wi th signals and isolated train detection sections on 
approach to the signals at the exit of the block section  to enforce elements of the absolute block 
working regulations.   
• Track circuit block working:  Track circuit block signalling is a development of absolute block 
signalling where the line is divided into reasonably uniform , and often much shorter , blocks 
between adjacent stop signals , increas ing the line capacity compared with absolute block 
signalling. Only one train is permitted per block section, usually defined as between one stop signal 
 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 3 of 13 
and the extent of the overlap (which is a safety margin)  beyond the next. It requires continuous 
train detection, which may be by track circuits or axle counters.  
Where m ovement authority is given to drivers via lineside signals , the sig nals can only transmit a limited 
number of different instructions to the driver. The meaning of each signal aspect must be clearly defined 
in the driver’s rule book. The information presented differs significantly between different countries and 
between route and speed signalling. There is often more than one caution signal before appro aching a 
stop aspect.   
 
Figure 1: Track Circuit Block with lineside signalling  
3.3 European Train Control System (ETCS)  
This is the signalling component of the European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS).  Unlike 
CBTC systems, which are currently unique to each supplier, the ETCS is designed to be an 
interoperable suite of products allowing trains to operate across borders without any country -specific 
equipment  and for one supplier’s on- board equipment to work with a different supplier’s fixed 
signalling.     
ETCS specifies several different “levels” and variants, the most significant ones are:    
• Level 0 is used to refer to an ETCS fitted train using infrastructure not fitted with train protection or 
when operation in higher levels is not possible.   
• Level NTC  is used by an ETCS fitted train when operating over a line which is only equipped with 
the National Train Control system  (Class B) .  Such systems in the UK are AWS /TPWS, in Germany 
LZB and in Belgium Crocodile/TBL.   
• Level 1 provides in -cab signalling and ATP (Automatic Train Protection) in conjunction with fixed 
block lineside signalling including train detection. Data is passed to trains from 
switchable/ controlled balises, inductive loops, or possibly radio.   
• Level 2 provides fixed block signalling and in- cab displays with conventional train detection. 
Communication is mostly through radio communication (GSM -R [Global System for Mobile 
Communications – Railway]), with balises used for fixed information (such as absolute position). 
Lineside signals are only required if used as a solution for migration, or for allowing non -ETCS 
trains to run on the same lines.    
• Level 3 is a term which formally became obsolete in baseline 3 (which subsumed it into Level 2) 
but is frequently still used to distinguish the circumstances in which conventional train detection is 
not required because reliance is placed on the on- board position reporting and train integrity 
monitoring.  There are no lineside signals and moving block signal ling is possible, although not 
necessarily implemented.   
3.4 Moving Block  working  
The signalling system calculates the safe space between a train and the one it  is following . This  
requires continuous communication between the central signalling system and the On-Board system  
which  supervises the train speed to maintain safety. The “blocks” are now a moving safe zone round 
each train; the length of the safe zone ahead of the following train depends on its speed, along with all 
the other factors that affect its braking distance. Therefore, a following train can be allowed to approach 
very close to the rear of a stationary preceding train (e.g. when it has stopped in a station) because its 
required braking distance decreases as its speed drops.    

 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 4 of 13 
Moving block allows trains to safely run closer together  because the relative positions of two trains can 
be determined with greater resolution than with track circuits or axle counters.  This can increase the 
line's overall capacity. It is most beneficial for mass -transit railways where platform dwell times are a 
large component of achievable headway. On mixed traffic lines it can still be valuable, but it provides 
less benefit because the line capacity is more affected by the shared use of the line by trains of different 
speeds, braking characteristics, confli cts at flat junctions (metro railways generally have grade 
separated junctions , mainline railways have far fewer ) and station stopping patterns.    
 
Figure 2. Comparison between fixed and moving block (does not show safety margins)  
 
3.4.1 Communication Based Train Control (CBTC)  
CBTC covers a wide range of bespoke signalling solutions from a variety of suppliers, particularly used on metro lines and generally has these characteristics:    
 Automatic Train Protection (ATP) & Automatic Train Operation (ATO)    
 Movement authorities are given to drivers via a display in the driving cab instead of lineside 
signals.   
 The train-borne equipment communicates with fixed equipment on the lineside by radio. Other 
communication methods have been used such as inductive loops in the track, these are generally referred to as TBTC (Transmission Based Train Control)   
 Train position determined by the train itself (via a combination of fixed position references such 
as balises, with subsequent estimation of the distance travelled primarily by wheel odometry  but 
supplemented by an independent method such as accelerometers) and then communicated to 
the central signalling.   
 No requirement for lineside train detection (track circuits or axle counters) for normal operation, 
but a certain amount is often provided for use in degraded modes, particularly when any train 
become s “non-communicative”.    
In addition to the capacity increase, a useful benefit of CBTC is the reduc tion in  the quantity of lineside 
equipment which offers maintenance and availability advantages (since otherwise it is often widespread 
and in places that are difficult to access).   
Within the i mplementation of CBTC , signalling the layout is a relatively minor consideration compared 
with other key considerations such as: the reliability and capacity of the communications medium,  the 
precision and certainty of a train’s footprint  and recovery scenarios should a train cease communicating,  
or a failure affect ing a whole area.  
 
  

 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 5 of 13 
4. Braking  
4.1 Significance of Braking 
A feature of railways is the low friction between steel rails and steel wheels; this has energy -saving  
advantages but means long distances to stop are required due to the limited adhesion. This can cause 
slips (as the train accelerates ) and slides (as the train decelerates ) which is a factor that onboard 
CBTC/ETCS needs to take into account  (uncertainty  is shown yellow  in Fig 2) .  
Trains can also be extremely heavy and/or travel at considerable speeds; a moving train therefore has significant momentum and there is a lot of kinetic energy to convert to other forms of energy during the process of stopping a train.  
Hence , Braking Distance (BD) (i.e. the distance required for a train to brake to a stand from its highest 
permissible speed at that position) is an important consideration within the design of a railway system to realise the key requirement : “Sufficient space should be provided between following trains to allow each 
train to brake to a stand safely”.    
Essentially this means that the signalling system has to communicate to the driver (or entity driving the 
train) that they are approaching the end of their movement authority in sufficient time and distance to 
enable the train to brake safely before it in all circumstances . 
This can be achieved by:    
• Lineside signal aspects – (giving cautionary signal aspects - with speed or distance meaning) .  
• In cab displays - (reflecting a braking curve-  with speed or distance meaning) . 
• Communication with an ATO system.   
4.1.1 Factors affecting B raking Distance:  
Braking distance depends upon:    
• Permitted speed of the train at the place that braking commences .  
• Braking rate of train (The braking performance of trains on a particular route is a key defined 
interface between the rolling stock system and the signalling system) . 
• Likely adhesion conditions between the train wheel and the rail (affected by weather or oil contamination that might cause slip/slide) . 
• The likely reaction time of the driver . 
• Brake build -up delay, i.e. the time during which the brakes gradually become increasingly 
effective after having been initiated by the driver (this depends on the design of the braking 
system , the length of the train and is a particularly relevant factor for long freight trains) . 
• Effect of a rising or falling gradient  on the effective braking rate. Clearly , a train travelling on a 
rising gradient will be able to stop in a shorter distance and conversely will take a longer distance on a falling gradient .  
• Train achieving specified performance throughout its life (wear & tear, some brakes potentially 
isolated) . 
• The comfort of passengers . 
The braking distance of a train in normal operation, taking into account all these factors is usually referred to as a Service Braking Distance (SBD) , whereas a  train making an Emergency Brake 
application would generally  be able to stop in a significantly shorter distance.  The SBD is utilised in 
laying out signals but  note that the spacing between block signals  could be longer or shorter than SBD  
(see Fig 4). 
 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 6 of 13 
 
Figure 3: Scenario in which block sections are  longer than Braking Distance  
 
Equation of BD :  In principle ( see 4.2 ), Braking Distance is proportional to the square of its initial speed 
and depende nt on the nominal braking rate of rolling stoc k (which in reality varies with speed and also 
takes time to reach full effectiveness).  
BD =   U 2 
  2.b BD = Braking Distance  (assuming level track)  
U = Initial speed  
b=Braking rate  
 
4.2 Specification of Braking Rates / Braking Distances 
In reality braking distance assessment is much more complex than the simplistic example above.   
Different railways use a variety of  approaches , generally based on empirical evidence.  
Mixed traffic railways  have to be catered for  the often widely different braking characteristics of modern 
passenger rolling stock and heavy freight trains. This is most commonly done by:       
• Calculating braking distances for higher speed passenger trains, laying out signals to suit these 
distances, and then limiting freight trains to a speed at which they can stop within these distances.    
• Calculating braking distances for freight trains, laying out signals to suit these distances, and then accept that passenger trains will have excessive braking distance.      
Unless used in conjunction with lineside signals, ETCS/CBTC is not constrained to fixed positions,  with 
each train determining where to commence braking according to the specific circumstances  and thus 
these trade -offs do not need to be made.     
 
  

 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 7 of 13 
5. Aspect Sequences 
Each railway administration has developed its own bespoke series of signal aspects with defined 
meanings  and the permissible sequence of aspects that can be displayed at successive signals.  Their 
meanings can be categorised as:     
• Stop – the end of the movement authority – almost universally Red or Twin Reds   
• Proceed, but prepare to stop at the next (or a subsequent) signal (route signalling practice).   
• Proceed, but limited to a defined speed (speed signalling practice).   
• Proceed at maximum permitted speed for that train .  
• Proceed only so far as you can vis ually see that the route is clear. ( This is used  for low -speed 
movements, but nomenclature and usage vary significantly between different railway 
administrations)    
Each railway administration also has defined permissible sequences of aspects that can be displayed 
by successive signals.  Figure 3 show s lineside signalling where there is one caution aspect before the 
stop aspect , whereas Figure 4 shows closer signal spacing and that a second train can more closely 
follow a first train on “clear” (unrestricted) aspects.  
 
Figure 4:  Scenario in which block  sections are shorter than Braking Distance  
 
6. Overlaps  
Drivers obey lineside signals and almost always  stop at a red signal at the end of their movement 
authority. However,  there are occasions when drivers might  fail to stop appropriately, for a number of 
reasons including:     
• Misjudgement of braking performance (e.g. unexpected poor adhesion)  
• Lack of attention or incapacity.   
• Lack of capability due to inadequate training.   
Many railway administrations reserve a portion of line beyond the end of a Movement Authority (beyond 
the stop signal) as mitigation against driver mistakes or adhesion conditions.   This is called an Overlap 
and, in general, is reserved for that one train in case it overruns. However, once the system has 
determined that this train is stationary (and therefore no longer liable to overrun), this reservation is released, permitting use of the area by another train.   
The length of an overlap can be determined in a number of ways:    
• A notional distance (sometimes dependent on the maximum speed on approach).   
• An individually calculated distance for every signal.  
 
  

 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 8 of 13 
7. Capacity 
7.1 Simple Headway       
The Headway Time is the minimum time ( which equates to a Headway D istance  at constant speed) 
between a train and a second following train, where the second train is approaching an unrestricted 
proceed aspect (i.e. NOT a cautionary aspect).    In the simplest case, where the two trains are both 
travelling at the same constant speed, then the Headway Distance between the front of the two 
succe ssive  trains is as indicated:    
 
Figure 5: Constant speed h eadway  (braking  undertaken within one block section)  
 
 
Headway  Distance (H) 
= S + P + O + L    
 Where:     
L = Length of Train   
O = Length of Overlap  
P = Distance from the Stop aspect back to the first Unrestricted Aspect 
on its approach  
S = Sighting Distance  
(allows for the fact that the driver might  brake prior to reaching a 
restrictive signal).   
For main line higher speed lines, P predominates and for lower speed & high- capacity metros, the other 
factors tend to be more predominant.   
When calculating braking distance contribution to headway, it is important to work from the maximum 
permissible speed NOT the timetabled speed.   For trains travelling at a constant speed, the headway 
distance can readily be converted to a headway time, but this should use timetabled speeds. This 
ensures that the worst case is taken into consideration.   
In Fig 5  which reflects any lineside signalling system in which there is only one cautionary aspect prior 
to the red (e.g. UK mainline 3- aspect) : 
 P = twice  the signal spacin g, each of which is a minimum of SBD  
  and therefore the best possible Headway = S + 2 x SBD + O + L   
In Fig 4 which reflects UK mainline 4 -aspect signalling  (but is essentially similar to some speed 
signalling systems ) where the braking from full line speed to a stop is achieved over two (or even more) 
signal sections : 
 P = three times the signal  spacing, with alternate signals spaced at a minimum of SBD  
 and therefore the best possible Headwa y = S + 1.5 x SBD + O + L   
Thus, the capacity of the railway has been increased, but at the cost and provision/maintenance of significantly more signalling infrastructure.   
  

 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 9 of 13 
7.2 Capacity constraints 
In reality however, most railways have lengths  of track  for which the permitted speed is less than the 
maximum elsewhere. Even where the speed profile of the line is unchanging, there are often 
intermediate stations and consequentially those trains that stop will be slowing down and accelerating again. If all trains stop and also have the same acceleration and braking characteristics, the signals can 
be spaced appropriately for the resultant speed profile, taking advantage of the shorter braking distance 
and attainable speeds.  This technique permits the distan ce between signals to be lower in the area of 
the station and thus still deliver good headway time, despite the slower running and the platform “dwell 
time”; it is usually only appli ed to metro railways.  
However, if the signalling needs to facilitate the running of any non- stopping trains, the signal spacing 
must always reflect the full braking distance; this means that the stopping headway (time between successive trains which stop at the station) would b e significantly increased. Timetabling one stopping 
train between a pair of non -stopping trains utilises a disproportionate  amount of line capacity.  Similarly,  
if a line is used by trains of different speeds, it makes no sense to talk of the headway of the line; it is a matter of working out the detail of how quickly the faster train will catch up the slower train and where the track layout is such that it can pass (overtake) it.  Computer simulations of possible timetables being implemented upon the proposed signalling are often undertaken at the conceptual stage of signalling 
the layout . 
Hence, factors that affect Headway are:   
• running stopping trains between non -stopping trains,   
• differential train speeds , meaning signalling cannot be optimum for both types ,   
• junctions which may be high or low speed but  are generally slower  than the straight -ahead 
speed.  
Trade-offs need to be considered between capacity  and speed. Service Braking Distance increases in 
proportion to the square to the speed and so tends to dominate for a higher speed line; if it is 
acceptable that the permissible speed is reduced then signals could  be closer together and the capacity 
improved.  The optimum capacity in terms of trains per hour ( minimum headways ) is obtained where all 
trains have the same characteristics in terms of acceleration, deceleration, maximum speed and 
timetabled stopping patterns. The best way to improve capacity measured by “ passengers  per hour” is 
often to run longer trains.  
For metro type railways, factors other than the Service Braking Distance largely determine  capacity , for 
example  the lengths of the train, the overlap, the sighting distance, the station dwell time. For heavy 
haul mineral railways, the Service Braking distance is important , but junction clearance at the end of a 
long single line section often predominates . 
 
8. Operational use of Track Layout  
So far, we have been considering a simple plain line railway, but we now need to look at the other 
primary role of signals, protect ing hazards such as point s and level crossings. It is important to 
understand the operational use which is made of the  track layout i.e . what train movements are 
required?  is there a need to join two separate trains together or undertake shunting movements 
passenger and/or freight?  
Junction protection and Signalling arrangements will be considered in sections 12  & 13, to which the 
considerations of section  9 are particularly relevant , but most  of it applies to all signals  so will be 
considered next.  
 
  
 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 10 of 13 
9. Signal Positions 
Apart from the considerations of headway and braking distances, there are also other constraints on the 
position of signals which need to be understood to correctly signal the layout.  Design for a particular 
railway needs to follow standards of the relevant  railway administrations  because they vary.  The 
following paragraphs summarise the most common.      
Physical sighting:  The purpose of the signal is to communicate information to the train driver. To 
enable this, the driver needs to be able to see it clearly for a sufficient period of time to assimilate the 
information. A site survey can be used to determine the final signal position to confirm readability , 
although increasing use is being made of virtual signal sighting (a computer model  based on existing 
site data and reflecting the proposed alterations being undertaken ).  Where a signal needs  to be 
positioned somewhere which does not provide adequate sighting distance,  the sighting deficiency must  
be mitigated  (various railways has different mitigations ; in UK Main line this generally involves provision 
of a banner repeating signal ).   
Parallel signals:  Not only does a driver have to be able to see a signal, but they also have to 
determine which signal applies to them if they can see more than one signal at the same time . For this 
reason, many railway administrations require that , when there are parallel lines signalled for the same 
direction of traffic, then the signals shall usually be adjacent to one another, unless specific measures 
are put in place to mitigate the risk of incorrect reading.  Examples may be mounting one at muc h 
reduced height or prov iding a short -range head or a physical screen  to obstruct the view from other 
directions . This is  particularly applicable for platform departure signals .    
Maint enance & Installa tion constraints : Signals need to be installed in a practical position - often a 
constraint on urban railways with viaducts and tunnels.  They also need maintenance, although this is 
less of a consideration for a LED signal than a traditional filament lamp signal. The aim should still be to 
avoid putting them where access would be a problem, such as on viaducts or in tunnels, but sometimes 
this is inevitable because of the need to respect other constraints. Where other considerations permit , it 
is advantageous to place the signal near an access point for convenience throughout its operational 
life.  
Overlap clear of junction:  If the overlap of a signal extends through a junction, then the route up to 
that signal will lock the junction, until the train has come to a proven stand at the signal  protecting the 
junction . This clearly precludes other simultaneous conflicting movements through the junction.  It is 
more flexible and greatly reduces the complexity of the interlocking if the overlap limit is  before the 
junction, especially on converging junctions  (see Fig 13).    
Reasonably Even spacing:  It helps a driver to know where  to expect a signal if they are relatively 
evenly spaced.  In particular , where an aspect sequence extends over two signal sections, it is easier 
for the driver to judge their brake application if the intermediate signal is placed approximately mid-way 
between the first caution and the stop.  
Overbraking:  The minimum distance between the first cautionary aspect and the stop signal at the end 
of the movement authority is the service braking distance. However, if the actual distance is very 
significantly greater than this, then there is a risk that the drive r becomes accustomed to not applying 
the brakes at the caution and may then forget or misjudge their brake application, resulting in the risk of 
overrunning their movement authority. For this reason, excessive over braking should be avoided if 
possible; In UK mainline, there is a 50% overbraking rule to limit  this. Other railway operators  prefer to 
place distant signals at a consistent distance from every  station , regardless of speed of line.    
Platform Starter signals:  Where signals are required in the vicinity of a station platform, then they 
should usually be positioned at or near the exit end of the platform (to minimise platform reoccupation 
time). Alternatively, the signal should be at least a train’s length beyond the platform (so that no part of a 
train stopping at it will still be in the platform).    
Standage:  In certain parts of the layout, it is necessary to be able to fit a train of the specified maximum 
length (perhaps in a loop line to allow the locomotive to run around to be at the other end of its train). 
The position of signals relative to each other, or relative to the point work or level crossing on its 
approach needs to be sufficient to avoid the rear of the train unnecessarily locking the infrastructure and 
hence prevent ing other movements . This needs to be consider ed with an appropriate all owance for 
 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 11 of 13 
such practical factors as the variation in stopping position of the train relative to a signal, and the 
potential for possible “roll back” of the train (especially where trains without full brake fitment operate).     
 
10. Train Detection  
For the purpose of layout design,  the important factor is defining the limits of each section. The number 
of train detection sections provides the “resolution” of the signalling system’s view of train positioning. 
 For the greatest “resolution” there needs to be more train detection secti ons, but clearly each section 
provided comes with an economic cost . However,  where there are ETCS trains reporting their positions, 
this information can be used to create virtual sections  (i.e. without needing equipment trackside)  within 
the interlocking.  
See section 1 2 regarding the positioning of train detection around point work . 
11. Signalling plan –  implications of Junction locking 
In order to successfully signal a layout, it is necessary to understand the principles of operation of the 
specific railway. In the diagram  below, signals 1, 3 and 5 are all placed sufficiently far from the point 
work that the overlaps beyond them are free of junction conflict; therefore all the points remain free until a route is set from any of those signals.  
Setting a route from signal 3 to signal 5 
initiates the movement of 102 points and 
101 points to normal and also reserves the 
sections of track from signal 3 to the end 
of the overlap beyond signal 5. As soon as 
the route starts to set, the signaller is 
prevented from setting a route from 1 
signal to 5 signal, or from 4 signal to 6 
signal; however a route from 4 signal to 2 
signal may be set since this does not need any of the already reserved section of line and requires points 101 also to be normal .  
Figure 12 : Junction locking considerations  
As soon as  all points have been detected to be in the correct position (assuming all other conditions 
are satisfied, such as relevant train detection sections proved clear), the signalling system will issue a 
movement authority to the driver by clearing signal 3 to an appropriate aspect.   
After the train has passed signal 3 (or its Approach Locking otherwise released), the “ Sectional Route 
Locking” imposed on each track section is released behind the rear of the train as it progresses through the route.  Once the train has moved wholly onto train detection section AD, 102 points 
become free, with 101 remaining locked.  This would prevent the route from signal 4 to 6 signal being 
set until the train had cleared the whole of AD section even if actually physically clear of points 101; the consequential delay would be lengthy if signal 5 were not showing a proceed aspect.  
 
 
Unnecessary delay could be eliminated by 
providing additional train detection 
sections to release the locking on points 
more quickly as shown  in this diagram , 
but these add to the cost.  
This is an example where Signalling the 
Layout needs to balance various different 
considerations when determining what 
facilities are economically justified for the 
intended use of the railway.   
 Figure 13: Optimising t rain detection limits at junctions  

 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 12 of 13 
12. Signalling plan –  implications of Junction Signalling arrangements 
Where lines diverge, the track layout is often designed (for economic or geographic reasons) such that 
one route (the main line) has a much higher permitted speed that the other route (the diverging line). 
 When a train is routed onto the diverging line, the driver needs to know sufficiently early so that they 
can adjust the train’s speed appropriately.     
• On a “Speed” signalled system, the driver can be notified by the aspect displayed at the 
previous signal(s)  the speed at which they may pass the junction signal .    
• On “Route” signalled systems, the driver is generally informed of the route set by  means of an 
Indicator at the junction signal and is expected to adjust their speed based on their knowledge 
of the route.  The problem is that, unless some form of warning has been given to the driver 
previously, there could be insufficient distance to brake to the permitted speed.    
On some railway administrations  therefore , earlier speed reduction is partially enforced by “Approach 
Release” .  This  means holding the junction signal at red (or perhaps yellow ) until the train is close to it 
(and should therefore have slowed) and the driver will be able to see any signal indication of divergent 
route before the signal clears for  it. This methodology can on its own be unnecessarily restrictive and so 
additional signal indications are sometimes provided at or near the previous  signal(s).   
13. Level (Grade) Crossings 
A level (grade) crossing is where a road crosses the railway line at the same level. Clearly there is a 
need to ensure that the road is closed to road traffic before a train is able to pass across the level 
crossing.   The signalling plan needs to take these factors into account.    
Railway administrations adopt a wide variety of methodologies for providing this protection with varying arrangements of lights, barriers, operating sequences etc., dependent upon local practice and highway 
regulations.     
However, they can be broadly split into 2 groups:    
• Crossings which are protected by signals. The signal is only allowed to clear when the crossing has been proved to be closed to road traffic and the crossing area itself is clear. Signalling 
design needs to ensure that protecting signals are positioned appropriately (not too close or too 
far away from the crossing) and that the level crossing sequence is commenced sufficiently 
early so that a train does not receive a restrictive aspect sequence from the signals on the 
approach to the level crossing protecti ng signal.   
• Crossings which are not protected by signals continuously detect that no train is approaching in order to maintain the road open. Signalling the layout must provide a means to give the 
required minimum warning time before a train arrives at the crossing (e.g. positioning strike -in 
points at sufficient distance), because it is essential that the road user is given enough time to 
avoid being on the crossing. Generally, such crossings are not interlocked with signals but there are special cases where there is a signal within strike in distance or if there is a station at which 
trains may stop.  
 
  
 
Signalling the Layout –  IRSE Certificate essential reading (for October 2025)  Page 13 of 13 
14. Summary of activity 
Signalling the layout is fundamentally  the art of selecting the most appropriate p ositioning of signals for 
the specific geography (the hazards to be protected, the design of the track layout, its speed and 
gradient profiles, respecting other site constraints), which:  
• is capable of delivering the operational requirements (accommodating the mix of traffic types, 
providing the appropriate routes to meet the specific needs of each of type, delivering the 
overall capacity and specific headway demands, flexibility of use in the various modes of 
operation),  
• takes into account the train characteristics (in particular the braking and acceleration 
performance) and the railway’s specific signalling principles and operational procedures 
designed to provide adequate safety,  
• is as economic as possible, considering the whole life cost of the new system and its interfaces 
to any existing signalling.  
It is inevitably a compromise of conflicting requirements which need to be addressed, typically in the 
following order : 
1. Requirements which relate to the safe operation of trains, based on the statistically sound 
assumption that drivers obey lineside signals; examples include sufficient braking distances, 
permissible aspect sequences.  
2. Requirements that relate to the relatively few occasions when drivers fail to obey lineside 
signals; examples include excessive over braking, overlaps, train protection.  
3. Requirements that relate to reliability, maintainability etc.  