4_Glossary of Train Control Terminology v1.2.docx   20-Dec-21 Glossary of Train Control Terminology  v1.2 
This glossary includes many of the terms that you will encounter in the C ertificate ( Module A ) 
of the IRSE Examination.  Its focus is on commonly used acronyms and on terms where, in 
different countries, there are alternative names in English for the same object, role, or 
function.  It is not a comprehensive list of all train control terminology.  It does not address 
telecommunications terminology because this tends to be more consistent between 
countries.  
You are not expected to learn the descriptions in the 3rd column.  Ju st look down the first 
column and check if there are any terms that you are not familiar with.  The term in the first 
column is the one that is usually used in the examination.  
 
Term  Alternative Terms & 
Acronyms  Describing  
Approach control 
(approach release)  Approach release  The restriction of the aspect of a 
signal, to control the speed of a 
train (e.g. to ensure that the 
driver can comply with the turnout 
speed at a junction)  
Approach locking   Approach locking prevents the 
immediate release of a route 
where it is possible that an 
approaching train may be unable 
to stop.  
Aspect  Signal lamp  
Signal light  Any valid visual indication of a 
signal as displayed to the driver.  
Automatic Train Control  ATC On-board automation that 
contributes to or replaces the 
driver’s judgement and actions in 
respect of controlling the train. It 
encompasses ATO and ATP.  
Automatic Train 
Operation ATO A system that automatically 
operates the train’s driving 
controls  
Automatic Train 
Protection ATP A safety system t hat enforces 
either compliance with or observation of speed restrictions 
and/or signal aspects by trains.  
Automatic Train 
Supervision ATS A non -safety system (common on 
metros) which regulates a train 
service, typically to maintain 
intended traffic patter ns and to 
minimise the effects of train 
delays on the operating schedule.  
Automatic Route Setting  ARS A system for setting routes 
without the action of the signaller 
(signal operator) . 
Automatic signal   A signal controlled by the 
passage of trains. It does not require any action by the signaller 
(signal operator) or ARS.  
4_Glossary of Train Control Terminology v1.2.docx   20-Dec-21 Term  Alternative Terms & 
Acronyms  Describing  
Axle counter   A method of detecting the 
absence of a train. Track 
mounted wheel sensors detect 
the passing train wheels (axles) 
and the axle counter evaluator 
counts the number of axles 
entering and leaving a train 
detection section at each 
extremity.  
Balise (beacon)  Transponder   
Tag 
Beacon  A track mounted unit that 
exchanges data messages with 
the train.  
Cab Secure Radio  CSR  A secur e radio communication 
system between driver and 
signaller (signal operator) . 
Colour light signal   A signal that conveys its 
information by coloured lights.  
Computer Based 
Interlocking  CBI 
PBI A safety interlocking system 
based on computers or 
processors.  
Communications Based 
Train Control  CBTC  An Automatic Train Control 
system, mostly used on metro railways, with train location 
sensing not requiring track 
circuits.  The train controlling 
functions are enabled by 
continuous data communications 
between train and wayside sub-
systems.  
Concentrator   A facility to connect several 
telephone circuits to one handset.  
Control centre.  
(see also Signal b ox) Signalling centre  
Operations control centre 
Dispatch office  
Train control centre  
Network control centre  A location where train operators 
monitor and control the operation of the railway over a large area.  
It usually incorporates operational 
functions beyond simply 
controlling the signals.  
Control table   A part of the signalling system 
specification that defines the 
detail of the signalling interlocking 
controls for each signalling 
function,  such as signals, points 
and routes . 
Equipment case    Apparatus case  
Apparatus cupboard  
Location case  
Cubicle  
Signalling Apparatus 
Box(SAB)  A housi ng containing apparatus 
which is intended for unprotected outdoor use.  
4_Glossary of Train Control Terminology v1.2.docx   20-Dec-21 Term  Alternative Terms & 
Acronyms  Describing  
European Rail Traffic 
Management System  ERTMS  A system for managing rail traffic, 
enabling it to operate on 
compatible signalling systems 
across European borders.  
European Train Con trol 
System  ETCS  The train control part of ERTMS.  
Facing Points  Facing point switch  A track switch at a diverging 
junction in the direction of travel  
Fail Safe FS A characteristic of a system 
which ensures that known, or 
expected malfunctions will 
maintain or place the equipment 
in a safe state.  
Flank protection   Protection from overrunning 
movements approaching on 
converging tracks.  
Fouling point   The position at  the convergence 
or divergence of two tracks where the structure gauge on each line 
would come into contact.  
Grade of Automation  GoA The extent to which the functions 
of the driver are controlled by a 
technical system.  
Global System for Mobile 
Communicat ions GSM   The standard which describes 
the protocols for digital networks 
used by mobile communications 
devices.  
Global System for Mobile 
Communications - 
Railway  GSM -R The system, based on GSM, 
which delivers digital secure 
communications between railway 
users (e.g. drivers and 
signallers) .  
Headway   The shortest time (or distance) 
interval between two trains, so that the second train can run at 
its full permitted speed without 
being restricted by the signal 
aspects.  
Impedance bond   A device whic h presents a low 
impedance to traction current and a higher impedance to track 
circuit current.  
Insulated Rail Joint  IRJ 
Insulated Block Joint (IBJ)  A joint of two sections of rail with 
insulation between them to maintain electrical isolation, 
usually fo r track circuit purposes.  
Interlocking   A general term applied to the 
system, which sets, secures and 
releases train routes for the safe 
movement of trains and transmits 
safe movement authorities to the 
train driver.   
4_Glossary of Train Control Terminology v1.2.docx   20-Dec-21 Term  Alternative Terms & 
Acronyms  Describing  
Level crossing.  Grade crossing  An intersection at the same 
elevation of a road and one or 
more rail tracks  
Limit of Shunt  LOS An indicator or sign to instruct the 
driver to terminate a shunting 
movement, particularly along a 
line in the wrong direction.  
Line capacity   For a given section of line, the 
practical maximum number of 
trains per hour permitted by the 
signalling system and operational 
constraints.  
Maintainer  Signal electrician  
Signal technician 
Technician A person who keeps the 
signalling or communications 
systems in safe  and reliable 
working order.  
Maintenance manager   A person responsible for the safe 
and reliable working of the signalling or communications 
systems and/or for supervising 
the maintenance activities.  
Operator   A person who operates the 
signalling or comm unications 
systems and is responsible for 
the safe operation of trains.  
Overlap   The distance beyond a signal that 
must be clear before a train is 
permitted to approach it.  
Permissible speed  Line speed  The maximum allowable safe 
speed over a section of line.  
Point machine  Point operating 
mechanism  The equipment for the powered 
operation of a set of points  
Points  Switches  The means by which a train is 
transferred from one track to 
another.  
Possession (of a line)  Occupation  The complete stoppage of all 
normal train movements on a running line or siding, usually for 
engineering purposes.  
Right side failure  Negligible risk failure  A failure which does not result in 
the protection provided by the 
signalling system being reduced.  
Route locking  Maintained locking  
Route holding Maintains the locking associated 
with a route in use until after the 
train has passed clear of the 
equipment being locked (for 
example, points or opposing 
signal).  
Running line  Mainline  A railway line that is not in a 
siding or depot.  
4_Glossary of Train Control Terminology v1.2.docx   20-Dec-21 Term  Alternative Terms & 
Acronyms  Describing  
Semaphore signal  Mechanical signal  A signal which informs a driver by 
means of the position of a 
mechanical arm during dayl ight 
and coloured lights during 
darkness  
Signal box  Signal cabin  
(see also Control centre)  The building in which the 
signaller (s) is/are situated 
together with the control and 
indication system for the 
signalling.  
Signaller (signal operator)  
(see also train controller)  Dispatcher  
Signalman 
Train control operator  A person responsible for the 
operation of the signalling system, to safely control the 
passage and regulation of trains.  
Signalling Equipment 
Room  SER 
Bungalow  
REB (Relocatable 
Equipment Building)  A “walk -in” room or independent 
building for housing signalling equipment  
Signalling panel  Signalling workstation  
Train control workstation Control panel  
Switch panel  The equipment that displays train 
information to the signaller (signal 
operato r) and which enables 
control of the signalling by 
buttons, keyboards or 
touchscreens.  
Toe of point  The end of a switch rail furthest 
from the crossing of the rails.  
Track Circuit  TC An electrical device using the 
rails in an electric circuit, which detects the absence of trains on a 
defined section of line.  
Trailing points  Trailing point switch  A track switch at a converging 
junction in the direction of travel  
Train controller  Network controller  A person responsible for safely 
managing a sect ion of railway 
including prioritising train movements, authorising track 
possessions and manging 
incidents.  The person may also 
operate the signalling system as 
shown for a ‘Signaller’ above  
Train Control System  TCS The system used in the control 
centre to convert operator inputs 
into commands to the signalling 
system and for sending 
indications from the signalling 
system and train descriptions to 
the signalling panel.  
4_Glossary of Train Control Terminology v1.2.docx   20-Dec-21 Term  Alternative Terms & 
Acronyms  Describing  
Train driver  Train operator  
Locomotive operator  
Engine driver  
Motorman  The person in the cab of a train 
operating or supervising the 
braking and acceleration of the 
train under instructions from the 
signalling system, a dispatcher or 
lineside signs.  
Wrong Side Failure  WSF  A failure that results in the 
protection provided by the signalling system being reduced 
or removed.  
 
The far more comprehensive ‘Glossary of Signalling Terms’ published by the UK Rail Safety 
and Standards Board is acknowledged in the preparation of this appendix.  