I RSE /
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Fundamental requirements for a
train control system
In the first of a planned series of 'back to basics' subjects
Operational requirements for
on train controland communications, this article
train control systems
summarises the fundamental requirements for a train
The system Will need to meet the needs of
control system. These requirements will be familiar to
operators in terms of:
experienced signalling engineers, but are recommended
reading for anyone new to railway controland
permitted train movements (such as normal running;
communications and for IRSE members preparing to
joining/ splitting; platform sharing, shunting);
take the IRSE Exam
permitted routing of trains;
The requirements were originally set out in the IRSE Signalling
capacity provision and utilisation;
Philosophy Review (2001) and have subsequently been
and flexibility of operations_
reviewed and revised
number oftimes
are available in
full via the IRSE website at irse.infolexous_
The system may also contribute to efficient resource
management, such as efficiency in traction energy
The requirements are not mandated by the IRSE, although
consumption, and minimising wear and tear on the track。
the Institution regards them as essential forany train
If, in addressing requirements for safety, the proposed design
control system。
constrains the operability of the railway, the impact of this Will
The word 'signalling' is defined by the IRSE as all the equipment
need to be assessed and minimised (but without compromising
electrical, mechanical or otherwise, methods, regulations and
acceptable levels of safety, of course)。
principles whereby the movement of railway or other traffic is
In order to deliver the timetabled train service, the specification
controlled. Throughout the requirements, and in this article, the
phrase
'train control system
includes the people; procedures
and attainment of appropriate levels of reliability and availability
are essential. Reliability and availability also contribute to overall
and
technology used to signal trains; and where the single word
levels of system safety. Maintainability is essential in order to
system" is used it means the
'train control system'
Where
ensure that the specified levels of reliability and safety continue
the phrase "signalling system" is used, this means the part of
the train control system which is implemented by means of
to be met throughout the service life of the system。
technology, which could be both infrastructure-based and
To achieve required levels of overall availability, the provision
train-borne. The requirements are equally applicable Whatever
of degraded modes of operation is desirable. However, human
form of train control system (as defined above) is used to
intervention as
a means Of safely controlling train movements
controltrain movements. Accordingly,
are Written at
under failure conditions (e.9. signallers authorising trains to pass
high level, with the intention that users interpret and apply the
signals at danger, manual on-site operation of points) entails
requirements through the specific method of train control that
significantly higher risk and is therefore not the preferred means
is proposed for a railway.
of meeting this requirement. Transitions to and from degraded
The requirements are in three sections. The first deals
modes of operation Will need to minimise risk, facilitated by
"graceful degradation"
as Wellas timely and safe mechanisms
with operational requirements, the second with functional
for recovery to normal operation。
safety requirements, and the third addresses supporting
safety requirements。
16
TO
BACK
BASICS
They
they

IRSE News
Issue 259
October 2019
I09
Train control has a long history but is evolving rapidly as technological change offers new
alternatives to manage the safe movement of trains to deliver the optimum experience for
railway passengers and freight users. There is however a series of underpinning requirements
for any train control system. Photo Shutterstock/hxdyl.
Functional safety requirements for
The train driver (or the automatic train operation sub-
train control systems
system [ATO]) will require unambiguous, consistent and
timely information that enables safe controlof the train。
Before a train is given authority to move along a section of
This may include:
line; the section of line needs to be proved to be secure (see
below) and clear of other traffic, to prevent derailments and
proceedlstop information;
collisions, and to avoid conflict with movement authorities
the provision of warning information regarding the
given for other trains_
approach to the end of the movement authority or a section
Exceptions to this are circumstances Where a train is permitted
of lower speed line, to enable the train to brake safely;
to enteran occupied section ofline; such as for platform
the provision of speed, routing, gradient, braking
sharing, coupling of trains, permissive working。
and shunting.
capability information.
Where the train is stationary at a station, depot or siding;
In addition, data entry sub-systems may be required in order to
activities such as train preparation, loading, unloading, closing
input train parameters that are relevant to the safe operation of
doors must also be completed before the train is moved.
the train control system (e.9. weight, length, braking capability)。
However, these activities are not normally regarded as part of
Sufficient space Will be required between following trains
the functionality of the train control system。
to allow each train to brake to
stand safely; this is usually
The term
secure
(see above) refers to a limited set of safety
calculated on the assumption that the train ahead is stationary。
requirements, primarily relating to the position and locking
Suitable control measures Will be required in order to prevent
Of
points, and the routing of other trains. Signalling systems
andlor mitigate the consequences of a train:
do not usually prove that the line is clearofall obstructions_
orthat the gauge is correct and the track is physically stable;
passing the end point of its movement authority;
so other control measures may need to be considered to
exceeding the maximum permitted speed;
manage these risks。
moving without authorisation.
When authority to move along a section of the line has been
Examples of technical solutions for these include overlaps, train
given, the security ofthe line needs to be maintained for the
protection/warning systems, flank protection, approach controll
movement until the complete train has:
release of signals, provision of trap points and speed signs。
It may also include other measures, e.9. driver competence;
passed clear ofthe section of line; or
provision of information to drivers and operating rules。
the authority has been rescinded (withdrawn) and the train
has come to
a stand; Or
Protection Will be required for the public and trains at level
crossings, although not all level crossings are necessarily
the authority has been rescinded (with information
protected by the signalling system itself (in simple cases an
communicated to the train) with the train
having
independent means of protection may be adequate based on
sufficient space to come to
a stand safely before the
risk). The operation of a level crossing will need to minimise the
start ofthe section of line over which authority to move
road closure time, otherwise this could lead to crossing misuse
had been given。
pedestrians and road vehicle drivers:
In some signalling systems sectional route release is used,
whereby parts of a section of line are released progressively
Trains
Worksites and workers will need to be protected during
When the train has passed clear; to facilitate earlier setting
engineering Work. This could include:
Ofotherroutes。
17
Dy

IRSE News
Issue 259
October 2019
facilities for
controlling the access of trains to sections of
The compatibility of the operating rules with the rest ofthe
line Where Work is taking place or where safety has been
train control system (and their completeness) is essential for
reduced as
a result Of engineering Work;
the safe operation of the railway under normal, degraded and
ensuring that the section of line is clear of obstructions
emergency conditions.
engineering vehicles) when work is complete and before
Even though the system may be highly automated, there Will
trains are allowed to run over it;
always be a measure of dependence on human interaction,
restricting the speed of trains to help protect track workers
for instance during degraded mode operation or during
Or because ofthe condition ofthe track;
maintenance. Appropriate allocation of functions between the
warning trackside workers of the approach of trains。
signalling system and operators;
and
designing the overall train
control system to make it easy for operators and maintainers
In order to provide a safe and efficient railway the signaller
to perform their actions safely, is vital. The human factors Will
Will require unambiguous, consistent and timely information,
need to be addressed to
help provide a safe and easy system to
and suitable control facilities, to enable the safe authorisation
operate, both for operators and maintainers_
oftrain movements (the term signaller also include other
personnel who may have responsibility for authorising train
Modern signalling systems usually revert to a safe state, such
movements). This includes the provision of information
as signals automatically restoring to
StOp'
although this may
required under failure and degraded mode conditions, as well
not always be necessary or desirable (and indeed mechanical
as for normal operations. Ancillary information systems such
signalling systems do not generally do this) . Designing the
as train describers, critical fault alarms and data entry systems
system so that failures and faults are
revealing to operators
may also be
required. When designing the signaller interface
and maintainers willaid prompt and safe rectification, and Will
systems, human factors assessments Will contribute to safety
help to avoid situations where a fault is latent (hidden) and does
and efficiency。
not reveal itself until some other event oCCUrs_
Facilities for communication between signallers and others
Unsafe interactions of the system With other railway systems
Willbe
required, for both normal operation and degradedl
and equipment need to be avoided. This includes both
emergency working. This includes communication With:
interactions where there is an intentional interface with other
systems and equipment, such as other railway infrastructure
train drivers;
and trains; and interaction where there is no interface; such as
signallers in neighbouring control centres;
electromagnetic interference_
Unwanted external influences
train operators and route controllers;
that could adversely affect the safety and availability of the
level crossing users;
system include:
emergency services
environmentall climatic effects;
The nature of the communications systems will need to
cyber-attacks on software-based subsystems;
be appropriate for the purposes required, for both normal
vandalism;
operations and failure/degraded mode situations。
unwanted electricallradio interactions with non-
A means will be
required for preventing trains from being routed
railway systems。
onto
a section of line with which they are not compatible
Problems can occur when
introducing new rolling stock on
Situations where this requirement could apply include:
routes with older
signalling systems;
which may not be immune
incompatibilities of gauge between track and train;
to interference generated by new trains. Introducing new rolling
stockin
a controlled manner will facilitate early identification
incompatible traction supply systems for the train;
and rectification of problems not addressed at the design stage:
incompatible train-borne train control sub-systems_
Systems that are designed so far as possible to prevent the
restrictions on access to tunnels for certain types of trains;
possibility of inadvertent errors during maintenance and repair
restrictions on specific train types being permitted on
work, and which incorporate diagnostic systems for monitoring
routes, adjacent lines etc, at the same time, such as
the health of the equipment, will contribute to its continuing
hazardous freight and passenger trains
safe operation and minimise the risk of
introducing undue risk
In order to instruct a train to stop in an emergency, appropriate
to either the operational railway or the personnel carrying out
facilities Will be required. This could be met bby functionality
the work. These considerations may have implications fore.9.
within the signalling system itself to enable
a movement
the design of equipment and its physical location.
authority to be withdrawn, or by the use of an alternativel
Personnel who design, build, test, commission, operate and
independent means such as radio communication with the
maintain the signalling system, orin any other way form part
driver. The speed and reliability with which
message can be
of the train control system, Will need to be competent in
given to a train to stop needs to be commensurate with the
order to perform their tasks and duties safely and efficiently。
risks associated with the emergency. The risk of stopping trains
This includes the competence of designers, testers,
in unsuitable locations also needs to be taken into account_
drivers, signallers
maintainers and others whose activities
Essential supporting safety requirements for
contribute to the overall safe working of the system. The
application of suitable procedures for personnel selection
train control systems
training, assessment and periodic review Will contribute to
The assignment of safety targets for a train control
continuing competence。
system will need to:
be commensurate with,
or better than, the levels of safety
performance of comparable systems already in service;
What do you think?
meet the reasonable expectations of users;
What other 'back to basics' articles would you like to see
comply with legal requirements_
in IRSE News?
not share your experiences with other
engineers? Email editor@irsenews.co.uk。
18
(e.9.
Self-
Why