18
Paul Darlington and David FennerTrain detection – the basics
This, second of a series of articles on ‘back 
to basics’ themes, looks at the essentials 
of train detection (or more accurately, as 
we shall see, train absence detection). One 
of the main safety requirements of a train 
control systems is the need to know it is safe 
to establish a route and provide movement 
authority for a train. In particular, before 
points or other moveable infrastructure 
has its position changed or a train is given 
permission to proceed, the relevant part 
of the line has to be proved to be clear of 
other trains. Thus, the ability to detect the 
presence of a train on a particular stretch of 
track is a key requirement for modern train 
control. The principles of train detection will 
be very familiar to experienced signalling 
engineers, and so this article is intended for 
members new to the industry.
There are currently two main types of train 
detection system, namely the track circuit and 
the axle counter. Both of them use track-based 
technology, and although other track-based 
solutions have been trialled over the years 
(including mass detectors, infrared and optical 
detectors), none of these have been widely 
adopted. We will look at both track circuits and 
axle counters in some detail in this article.
An alternative approach is to use train-based 
technology, whereby the train determines its 
location and communicates this information to 
the interlocking and control centre on a regular 
basis using a reliable secure communication link. 
Various technical options exist, including:
• Satellite positioning (Global Navigation Satellite 
Systems – GNSS).
• Odometry (counting wheel revolutions).
• Video (by recognition of 
infrastructure features).
• Proprietary systems offered, in particular, 
by Communication-Based Train Control 
(CBTC) suppliers. These solutions are sometimes used in 
combination to achieve the required degree 
of positional accuracy, and they may also be 
supplemented by equipment such as track-based 
balises or RFID (radio frequency identification) tags 
to periodically correct incremental positioning 
errors. Train-borne positioning systems are a 
standard feature of modern CBTC systems (which 
often use moving block technology) and will be 
for ERTMS Level 3 as well. We will explore this 
subject further later in this article. 
All train-borne positioning systems rely upon 
some form of train to track communication 
system so that the interlocking is regularly 
provided with up-to-date information about 
the train location. This may be a radio system, 
or a short-range communication system such 
as inductive loops in the track, Wi-Fi, or leaky 
feeder technology. 
Despite the growth of train-based technologies, 
for the majority of railways around the world that 
use train detection systems, the track circuit and 
the axle counter continue to be the favoured 
solutions. There are, of course, also many railways 
which use little or no train detection technology 
and rely instead on ‘absolute block’ methods of 
working or ‘train orders’ (verbal communication 
between the control centre and the train drivers).
Track circuits
The track circuit was originally used simply to 
remind signallers that a train was present on a 
particular section of track, not as an integral part 
of the locking of points and signals. It was the 
development of the track circuit that enabled the 
full potential of ‘space interval’ signalling based 
on track circuit block principles (continuous train 
detection between signal boxes). It also enabled 
signals to be provided that worked automatically 
with the passage of trains. 
The track circuit continuously proves the absence 
of a train from a given section of track in a fail- 
safe manner. It cannot prove the presence of a “There are two 
main types of 
technology 
generally 
used for train 
detection”

 IRSE News |  Issue 261  |  December 2019
19
train, since almost any failure mode will give the 
same indication as if a train is present. By positively 
proving the absence of a train, a track circuit can 
be used to confirm that it is safe to set a route and 
permit a train to proceed. The track circuit should 
not be confused with a ‘rail circuit’, which is used 
for non-fail-safe applications to positively prove 
the presence of a train. 
Fundamental design principles of 
track circuits
The most basic track circuit consists of a source 
of electrical energy (a direct current – DC), fed 
through an impedance and along the rails to a 
boundary which is defined by a pair of Insulated 
Rail Joints (IRJs are provided at both ends of the 
track circuit to define the detection limits of the 
track circuit). At the boundary a detection device, 
typically a relay, is connected across the rails and 
is energised by the direct current provided there is 
no train present (see Figure 1). 
Thus, the track circuit confirms the absence of a 
train to the signalling system (track circuit clear). 
The presence of metal wheels and axles of a train 
within the track circuit boundaries will cause the 
rails to be ‘short circuited.’ The increased current 
flow results in a greater volt drop through the feed 
impedance which, together with the shunting 
effect of the short circuit, means the detector no 
longer sees sufficient electrical energy to remain energised, and so it changes to the ‘de-energised’ 
state. This state change informs the signalling 
system that the track is ‘occupied’. 
Any electrical short-circuit between the rails, 
whether caused by a train or not, or any 
disconnection within the circuit (for example a 
cable being cut or falling off the rail), or a loss 
of supply current, will cause the track circuit to 
inform the signalling system it is occupied. This 
means that virtually any equipment fault will cause 
the system to ‘fail safe’ and thereby maintain 
signals at red. Although safe, this behaviour can 
result in unreliability, especially if the track circuit is 
not set up or maintained correctly. A track circuit 
operating device (e.g. ‘clips’) can also be used to 
protect a train in an emergency. Correct operation 
of a track circuit also depends upon good 
electrical contact between a train’s wheels and the 
rails, together with a continuous low-impedance 
path between each wheel via the connecting axle 
on the train. This will be discussed later.
DC, AC and coded track circuits
Simple as the track circuit may seem, there 
are various ways of powering the system and 
detecting the state of the track circuit (occupied or 
clear), and all have their benefits and weaknesses. 
The source of electrical energy may be any of 
DC, AC at power frequencies (typically 50Hz), 
AC at audio frequencies (a few thousand Hz), Electrical 
source
(feed)Detector
(relay and 
repeater 
circuit)T
TT
TTrain wheel 
setInsulated 
Rail Joints 
(IRJs)
Figure 1 – The 
fundamental principles 
of the track circuit are 
simple. A train travelling 
between an electrical 
source and detector 
shorts out the current 
flowing between them, 
and the loss of current 
at the detector indicates 
that the absence of trains 
can no longer be assured. 
More modern devices use 
coded, typical shift-keyed, 
signals to offer more 
immunity to complex 
traction systems.
Bombardier’s EBI Track 
400 is typical of modern, 
microprocessor-based 
track circuits that use 
coded waveforms to 
provide traction immunity 
and can operate without 
insulated rail joints.
Photo Bombardier.
 IRSE News |  Issue 261  |  December 2019
20
a series of impulses or complex waveforms 
including digital codes. Similarly, the detector may 
be a simple relay, an AC ‘vane’ relay or a more 
complex receiver tuned to a particular frequency 
or pattern of signals. It should be noted that the 
high volume of conductive metal in a rail results 
in a high inductance and thus track circuits with 
a high frequency component tend to be short in 
length. Some track circuits can also act as a carrier 
for coded signals that are passed to the train. 
These are usually associated with ATP and early 
ATO systems, and examples include TVM430, the 
original ATP system used on French High-Speed 
lines, and the original implementation of ATP with 
ATO on the London Underground Victoria line. 
The two rails on a railway are in practice not 
perfectly insulated from each other. There is 
always a leakage path between the two through 
the rail fixings, the sleepers, the ballast and 
the ground itself. This is known as the ballast 
resistance. Its value is dependent upon the 
condition of any rail insulation, the cleanliness of 
the ballast, and the prevailing weather conditions. 
It is inversely proportional to track circuit length. 
High ballast resistance values are ideal for a 
track circuit and may be obtained in dry/clean 
conditions or during frosty weather, but wet 
conditions may reduce the value significantly, 
especially where there is bad drainage and/or 
contamination from conductive materials in the 
track-bed. So, if for instance the track is flooded, 
the track circuit will show occupied and the signal 
controlling the track section will remain at red. 
Wet tunnels, sea walls and similar locations can be 
a particular problem, as the conditions can vary 
significantly on a frequent basis, which means that 
the track circuits need to be repeatedly adjusted 
to keep them working reliably and safely. 
One difficulty with adjusting track circuits is 
knowing the prevailing value of ballast resistance. 
If a track circuit fails due to wet weather, it may 
be possible to remedy the situation by reducing 
the feed impedance. However, a too low feed 
impedance can lead to trains not being detected 
(a ‘wrong side failure’). This will occur when a low 
feed impedance allows enough energy to reach 
the detector despite a train standing on the track. 
Some track circuits with highly variable ballast 
conditions may need frequent, often seasonal, 
adjustment to avoid this risk. This adjustment and testing currently has to be carried out manually, 
putting staff out on the railway and therefore 
placing them at risk, as well as being an expensive 
and time-consuming use of resources.
Rust films and contaminants
The resistance through the train’s wheels and axles 
is also an important factor, as it is the train which 
shorts out the track circuit. There are several ways 
in which the resistance of this short circuit may 
increase, with detrimental effect on operation. 
One way is the presence of a rust film on the 
rail head or wheel. The mechanical strength of 
light rust films is much reduced by the presence 
of moisture, when the contaminant tends to 
be squeezed out from the wheel/rail contact 
patch. Therefore, lightly rusted rails will only 
be a problem when dry. Very heavy rust, from 
prolonged disuse of the track, or after re-
railing with new rail, can result in track circuits 
being incapable of detecting trains, especially 
lightweight trains as they are not heavy enough to 
penetrate the layer of rust. Therefore, care needs 
to be taken after track relaying, when track circuits 
should not be restored to full operation until a 
good electrically conductive surface has been 
created. One positive result from today’s crowded 
railway on some routes is that busy lines have little 
chance to rust, reducing the problem. However, 
seldom-used branch lines, particularly in coastal 
regions where rust formation is exacerbated by 
salt, are at risk.
Other contaminants that increase the electrical 
resistance between the rails and the train’s wheels 
can cause the same problems. Those associated 
with falling leaves are generally limited to the 
autumn, and are usually confined to known 
locations, which may include built-up areas. 
Leaves are drawn into the wheel–rail interface by 
the passage of a train where they are squashed 
into a pulp. This contaminates both the rail 
and wheel, causing wheel-slip problems when 
wet, and significantly increasing the electrical 
resistance when dry. 
Reasonably dry weather with little wind will cause 
the leaves to fall gradually over a longer period, 
and they will be reasonably sap-free when they 
do fall. But high wind conditions will lead to a 
sudden fall of sap-laden leaves, giving rise to the 
worst conditions. 
In many temperate 
climates autumn leaf fall 
can cause contamination 
on the rail head, and 
unreliable shunting of 
track circuits.
“Tread-braked 
trains can 
sometimes give 
a better track 
circuit shunt than 
modern disc-
braked trains”
 IRSE News |  Issue 261  |  December 2019
21
Problems with coal dust and other similar 
contaminants on the rail head tend to be confined 
to collieries and other loading/unloading areas. 
Sand contamination can also be a problem, 
although not so much due to seaside locations, 
but with slow-moving locomotives using 
excessive amounts of sand for adhesion purposes. 
In each of these cases, the effect is similar to 
heavy rust. Problems can also occur with ballast 
condition issues associated with carbon-based 
contaminants, and of course heavy rain causing 
puddles and floods can short out the track circuits.
Train issues
Where a thin film of contaminant insulates the 
wheel from the rail, this can often be pierced if 
there is a rough surface on the running face of the 
wheel. The older style of tread brakes caused the 
wheel tyres to be cleaned and roughened at each 
brake application, whereas more modern disc-
braked trains do not, and the tyres may be rolled 
into a very smooth surface condition. Therefore 
older tread-braked trains generally provided 
better track circuit operation than modern 
disc-braked trains. 
Similarly, the axle weight has an effect, as a heavy 
load will pierce a film more easily. Again, modern 
lightweight trains, which are designed to minimise 
track wear, cause more track circuit problems than 
old-style heavy locomotive hauled trains. 
To assist vehicles to shunt track circuits, a device 
known as the ‘Track Circuit Assister’ (TCA) is 
sometimes fitted to modern trains in Britain 
to induce an electrical potential between the 
wheelset and the rail head and thereby break 
down any insulating film. Typically, a TCA consists 
of a control unit and aerial with associated tuning 
unit, mounted between a pair of wheelsets close 
to the rails. These devices tend to be fitted to the 
end bogies of the train because it is important, 
especially around point work, that the extremities 
of the train are detected so that the points cannot 
be inadvertently moved at the wrong time.
Insulation
As has been described, any direct metallic 
connection between the two rails will be 
interpreted by the track circuit as a train and will cause the track circuit to show occupied. 
Therefore, apart from the insulated rail joints or 
block joints used to electrically separate sections 
of line, the reliable operation of track circuits also 
requires the provision of insulators to stop other 
track components shorting out the track circuit. 
At a set of points, for example, there are many 
cross-rail connections – stretcher bars, point 
motors and heating elements – all of which 
need to be insulated, giving rise to quite 
complex insulating and bonding arrangements. 
In addition, the actual running rails cross at the 
‘frog’ or ‘heel’ of the points, requiring insulated 
rail joints and bonding in the switch rails to 
transfer the polarity of the circuit to the other rail. 
Designing track circuits to work reliably and safely 
through complex switches and crossings can be 
quite a challenge!
Concrete sleepers incorporate a rubber pad under 
the rail foot and moulded insulations where the 
fixings bear on the top of the foot. These increase 
ballast resistance to levels significantly higher than 
can be obtained with timber sleepers. However, 
the insulations can erode due to the vibration 
of passing traffic and, consequently, require 
inspection and periodical replacement – another 
maintenance overhead. Steel sleepers are even 
more of a problem. They are also insulated, of 
course, but any degradation of that insulation will 
result in severe problems. 
Ultimately the maximum length of a track circuit 
will be limited by the achievable ballast resistance, 
its variability with prevailing environmental 
conditions, and the level of reliability required. 
It will also be influenced by interference from 
electric traction, which is discussed below. In the 
UK it would be reasonable to assume that these 
factors limit a track circuit to a maximum of about 
1500m, although isolated examples of longer 
ones can be found.
Bonding
Bonding is the means by which the individual 
components of the railway track are connected 
together electrically for track circuit purposes. 
The term also includes the additional electrical 
connections necessary for the proper operation “Direct metallic 
connection 
between the 
rails will cause 
the track circuit 
to show as 
occupied”
“Insulated 
rail joints are 
expensive, both 
to install and to 
maintain”
The black art of bonding 
in areas with track circuits 
and third-rail traction is 
very visible in this view 
of Clapham Junction in 
South London, UK. Look 
out for impedance bonds, 
traction cross-bonds, and 
track circuit bonding in 
this photo.  
Photo Shutterstock/  
Ian Stewart. 
 IRSE News |  Issue 261  |  December 2019
22
of electric traction. For a track circuit to fail 
safe (show occupied) in the event of a bonding 
disconnection, it is necessary to bond all elements 
of the track circuit in series, so that any one 
failure breaks the circuit. In practice, in switches 
and crossings it may not be physically possible to 
arrange series bonding of every part of every rail.
Later in the article we will deal with single rail 
traction bonding (which only provides series 
bonding for the track circuit signal rail as the 
traction return is usually bonded in parallel 
with other traction return paths); and ‘double 
rail traction bonding’ (providing total series 
bonding for a track circuit as well as both rails 
for the traction return path). In the majority of 
cases traction bonding through switches and 
crossings is single rail traction where track 
circuits are provided.
Insulated rail joints
IRJs are expensive, both to install and to maintain, 
especially on tracks subjected to high speed, high 
axle-weight traffic or where there is an intensive 
service. A rail joint also presents an increased risk 
of rail fracture, although now with factory made 
six-hole glued joints this is less of a risk than with 
older styles of IRJ. As mentioned above, they are 
also required in areas of points and crossings, 
which makes the railway less physically robust 
than track engineers would wish. 
It is also possible for the insulation in the IRJ to be 
compromised, either by failure or by burring of the 
top of the rail such that it bridges the insulating 
element. This could cause a wrong side failure 
because one track circuit supplies power to the 
detection element of the next track circuit, across 
the failed IRJ. For this reason, most simple DC and 
low frequency AC track circuits connect to the 
rails with opposite polarities either side of the IRJ 
to ensure that, should the insulation fail, both track 
circuits will show occupied. 
One solution for avoiding IRJs is the use of 
audio frequency AC track circuits which permit 
the physical limits of an individual track circuit 
to be defined by ‘tuned’ zone, rather than by 
insulators in the rails. Adjacent and parallel track 
circuits operate at different audio frequencies 
and each one is designed to detect its own track frequency but no other. It is possible, with careful 
design, to arrange a short overlap in the centre 
of the tuned zone where both track circuits are 
effectively shunted. 
The use of audio frequency track circuits is not 
always a practicable solution for complex switch 
and crossing layouts, not least because of the 
complication of significant rail impedances 
associated with parallel bonding. 
Broken rails
By their very nature of operation track circuits 
are sometimes regarded as a means of detecting 
broken rails. However, track circuits will only 
detect a broken rail that is fractured all the way 
through and is not bridged by any form of bonding 
or other electrical connection. So, a damaged 
rail head or foot will not be detected but could 
be equally problematic. On an electrified railway 
the need to maintain a traction current return 
path through one of the rails and other paralleled 
conductive infrastructure means that in many 
cases breaks can only be detected in the other rail. 
Hence broken rail detection is, at least in the UK, 
now managed by the routine monitoring of the 
rail condition including ultrasound scanning, not 
by dependence upon track circuits. And of course, 
as we shall see, axle counters are of no help at all 
with broken rail detection.
Electric traction
On electrified railways, track circuits must operate 
despite large traction return currents passing 
along the same rails. The disparity is substantial, 
with AC traction currents of 300A or more and 
DC traction operating at up to 7000A. These 
values exclude traction fault conditions and are far 
larger than the track circuit currents which are a 
few amps at most. This gives rise to the concept 
of AC immune and DC immune track circuits. 
There are also some areas that have both forms 
of traction current supply which therefore require 
dual immunity. 
The initial way of providing immunity was to use 
DC track circuits in AC territory and AC phase 
sensitive vane relay track circuits in DC traction 
territory. Where both types of traction were in 
use it was not unusual to use a locally generated 
special frequency to power AC track circuits, such 
Below left: Rail breaks are 
rarely as clear-cut as this 
example, and not all rail 
breaks will be detected by 
track circuits – but no rail 
breaks will be detected by 
axle counters.
Photo Shutterstock/
Michael715.
Below right: The 
introduction of any 
new or different rolling 
stock on areas where 
train detection is a 
significant part of the 
signalling system requires 
detailed analysis of the 
susceptibility of the 
trackside equipment to 
large traction currents.
Photo Hitachi.
“Audio-frequency 
track circuits can 
be unsuitable 
unless the point 
work is very 
simple”
 IRSE News |  Issue 261  |  December 2019
23
as 83.33Hz using rotary converters. This enabled 
the track circuits to detect and respond to the 
83.33Hz frequency but not DC or 50Hz AC.
Today, whilst these arrangements are still 
common, there is a steady increase in the use of 
modulated audio frequency track circuits selected 
for immunity. This move is partly the result of the 
application of three phase traction drives, which 
produce many harmonics some of which are 
present in the traction return currents. In practice 
the range of frequencies produced by modern 
three phase traction units makes it a challenge to 
find immune frequencies suitable for track circuits. 
This is also one of the reasons why there is a 
trend to use axle counters as the modern form of 
train detection. 
Track circuit arrangements in electrified areas 
are constrained by the need to ensure safe and 
reliable operation of both signalling and traction 
systems. This means that the track circuit must be 
immune to both false operation and to damage 
by the flow of traction currents through the rails. 
This also causes complications because, while 
the signalling track circuits are separated from 
each other by IRJs, the traction current needs 
a continuous electrical connection back to 
the substation. 
This problem has led to the use of impedance 
bonds on double rail traction track circuits. These 
are devices that present a low impedance to 
traction current and a higher impedance to track 
circuit current. In simple terms, they allow traction 
current to pass along the rails and around the 
IRJs, but stop the track circuit currents in order to 
separate one track circuit from the next.
Although track circuits are designed to be immune 
to false operation (wrong side failure) from the 
presence of traction currents flowing in the rails, 
any significant imbalance in the amount of current 
flowing in the two rails may be misinterpreted by 
the track circuit detector as indicating that the 
track is unoccupied when it is not. In particular any 
fast change in the traction current may cause a 
Axle counters are 
increasingly preferred as 
a less intrusive means of 
train detection.
Photo Thales .short-term imbalance, which is why track circuits 
on electrified lines are normally designed to be 
slow to energise (i.e. slow to show track clear). 
In DC electrified areas, the relatively low supply 
voltage results in high currents returning to the 
sub-stations via the running rails. In order to 
minimise voltage drop and consequential power 
losses in the DC-traction supply, all running 
rails are used for the return of traction currents 
wherever possible, and therefore double- rail track 
circuits are used. There is usually cross bonding 
between different tracks as well so that the current 
has as many feed and return paths as possible, 
again to minimise traction energy losses. As in AC 
areas, impedance bonds are used to ensure the 
traction current has a return path to the sub-
station, whilst the adjacent train detection sections 
are kept separate from each other. In switches and 
crossings, however, it is not usually possible to 
bond the track in double-rail form, and therefore 
single-rail track circuits must be installed. It should 
be noted that ‘single rail’ track circuit really means 
single rail traction current return, as both rails are 
still used by the track circuit. 
In AC overhead electrified areas, traction currents 
are generally lower than in DC systems and, in 
many cases, single rail traction return is sufficient 
for electrification purposes. However, increased 
traffic levels and alternative feeding arrangements 
may sometimes require that both running rails are 
used for traction return.
Coded track circuits
Coded track circuits can be used to transmit 
information to a moving train. The amount of 
information that can be communicated is limited 
to simple messages, for example transmitting 
one of a small number of modulations (14-20) 
to send maximum safe speed and target speed 
combination. Such systems can require extensive 
lineside equipment for each track circuit, 
especially on bi-directionally signalling lines. For 
the train to successfully detect the transmitted 
information before it is shorted out by the train “Coded track 
circuits can be 
used to transmit 
information to a 
moving train”
 IRSE News |  Issue 261  |  December 2019
24
wheels it must always run towards the transmitter 
end of the track circuit. Thus, on bidirectional lines 
it is necessary to switch the feed and detector 
(relay) ends of the track circuit depending on 
the direction of travel of the signalled train. This 
added complexity and the consequentially greater 
failure risk is one of the reasons that modern 
train supervision systems are generally moving 
away from coded track circuits to radio-based 
communication systems.
Axle counters
As its name suggests, an axle counter system used 
track-mounted equipment to count axles entering 
and leaving a track section. This information is 
evaluated to determine whether the track section 
is occupied or clear. They perhaps they should 
be more accurately called wheel counters, since 
the device attached to the rail uses a magnetic 
field to detect the passage of the rim and flange 
of a wheel. But because on most rail vehicles 
the wheel is connected to an axle with another 
wheel on the opposite side, they are called axle 
counters. Each axle counter head usually has two 
detectors on the rail, so the direction of travel 
can be identified. The head is connected to an 
evaluator which counts the number of wheels that 
pass. To make a train detection section two heads 
are connected to one evaluator, denoting the 
ends of the train detection section. One counts 
the wheels that enter the section and the other 
subtracts the wheels that have left the section. If 
the answer is zero the track section is deemed to 
be clear of trains. Note that because both heads 
can tell the direction of travel, both can either add 
or subtract from the total. Typically, one head can 
communicate with two evaluators, meaning one 
head is used both to count axles exiting from one 
section and entering the next.
As can be seen from the above description axle 
counters depend on the equipment being able 
to count and store in memory the number of 
wheels that have passed. Such technology, as 
well as the communication between the three 
elements of the system, is much easier with 
modern computing systems and this explains 
the relatively recent increase in their use in some 
parts of the world. Other reasons for adoption are 
they are very largely (although not completely) 
immune to traction current interference; there is 
no limitation on section length, so especially on 
rural routes the volume of trackside equipment 
and associated power supplies becomes much 
smaller; and they are not influenced by rail head 
or ballast resistance conditions. In addition, 
the traction supply engineer is able to design 
the traction return system including all the 
cross bonding required, as well as the track 
earthing connections for AC traction, without 
the constraints of track circuit application rules. 
Finally, there is no requirement for an IRJ or block 
joint, which increases the integrity of the track 
system and reduces costs. Axle counters are now 
the preferred method of train detection for all 
new schemes in Great Britain and in many other 
countries throughout the world.One particular advantage of axle counters over 
track circuits is that they can be overlaid on 
another detection system (whether track circuits 
or another axle counter system) during a re-
signalling, thus enabling the new detection system 
to be tested and proved to be operational before 
it is required to control the railway. Compare this 
with track circuits where only one track circuit can 
be installed on a section of track at a time.
Axle counters are not without their problems, 
however. An axle-counter section cannot be 
made ‘occupied’ by the use of a track-circuit 
operating device to protect a train, nor will 
an axle-counter system detect a broken rail. 
However, the introduction of train radio for 
emergency communications has provided an 
acceptable alternative to the use of track circuit 
operating clips, and as referred to earlier, a track 
circuit is not regarded as a reliable means of 
detecting a broken rail.
More significantly, when an axle-counter system 
fails it loses track of how many axles have passed 
through it since the failure occurred. Therefore, 
for safety, it is designed so that when the failure 
is fixed, it shows the section of line as being 
occupied, unlike a track circuit. The section then 
needs to be proved clear of a train before the axle 
counters can be reset and restored to operational 
use, which can take some time.
Another problem with axle counters is that a 
right-side failure can occur when a wheel stops 
directly above the inductive sensor, known as 
‘wheel rock’. When the train leaves there is a high 
risk the section will remain occupied with no 
train present and the time-consuming process 
of reset and restore has to be carried out. That 
can cause difficulties at a busy station, especially 
if the platform is configured for multiple short 
trains stopped at various locations along the same 
platform. For these reasons, some sections of 
railway (e.g. Thameslink in the UK) have decided to 
retain track circuits where there are multiple split 
sections along the platforms.
Cab signalling systems
Modern signalling has a greater dependence on 
train-borne systems and communications, with 
CBTC becoming the dominant form for metro 
lines. These systems rely on the train regularly 
reporting its location and other information to the 
control centre, for which of course it requires a 
reliable communication link. Wi-Fi or data enabled 
radio (e.g. 4G/LTE) are used for the ground to train 
communications, with 4G/LTE now becoming 
favoured due to availability concerns with Wi-Fi. 
Together with the use of ATP and ATO, these are 
the key reasons why capacity can be increased 
on metro routes. 
ETCS is the equivalent of CBTC for main line 
railways. However, enabling a main line train to 
define its position accurately is a greater challenge 
than is the case with metros (the latter invariably 
having fixed formation trains). Whilst the leading 
vehicle of a train may be able to inform the 
control centre of its location and movement, it 
is much more difficult to confirm the location “One particular 
advantage of axle 
counters over 
track circuits is 
that they can 
be overlaid 
on another 
detection 
system” 
 IRSE News |  Issue 261  |  December 2019
25
of the rear of the train (unless the train is a fixed 
formation). In particular it is difficult to confirm 
that the train is still complete i.e. no vehicles have 
been left behind due to detachment (known as 
‘train integrity’). The lost wagon or coach on a 
locomotive hauled train remains a significant 
challenge for main line railways. Thus, although 
ETCS level 2 can be operated without lineside 
signals, it still uses trackside train detection based 
on track circuits or axle counters. 
ETCS level 3 is the conceptual system that 
will enable trackside train detection to finally 
be removed on main line railways, but when 
we will see it deployed extensively is an open 
question. The option of ETCS hybrid level 3 is one 
way of gaining some of the benefits of Level 3 
whilst avoiding the train integrity problem. In 
hybrid level 3, fixed formation trains such as 
multiple units, which can easily be confirmed 
to be complete, are allowed to operate at 
level 3 whereas others (loco hauled freight and 
passenger trains) are operated in level 2. Thus, the 
infrastructure is equipped with train detection, but 
more than one level 3 train may occupy a given 
train detection section at a time. Furthermore, if 
the trains that are operating in level 2 in a hybrid 
level 3 area are sufficiently infrequent, it may be 
possible to have longer train detection sections 
and thus less trackside equipment on such lines. 
ETCS standards currently specify that trains 
identify their location using a combination 
of balise reference points and tachometry, 
supplemented by Doppler radar. However, there is 
no fundamental reason why this information could 
not be generated from Global Navigation Satellite 
Systems (GNSS) such as GPS, or video tracking and 
position identification, provided it can be proven 
to meet the appropriate Safety Integrity Level (SIL). 
Even in full level 3 areas, some track-based train 
detection is still usually considered essential 
in locations where moveable infrastructure, 
especially points, require locking. The provision 
of some track-based train detection may 
also help recovery to normal operations after 
an ETCS failure.
GNSS and Positive Train Control (PTC) 
In the US, systems using GNSS are being 
introduced as part of the requirement to introduce 
Positive Train Control (PTC) over some 60 000 
miles of railways. The challenge of installing PTC 
is further complicated by the fact that there are 
ten different systems in use across the US. Some 
systems use satellite links for train separation 
and were designed for areas of ‘dark territory’ 
where line-side signals and train detection are not 
provided and instead trains are controlled by train 
orders and track warrants.
As well as train location, GNSS based systems can 
also be used for passenger information both on 
trains and at stations. A further possible use of 
GNSS is to trigger the warning on the approach 
to a level crossing with a constant-time lapse 
regardless of the speed of the train. In a similar “Track circuits 
will still be used 
for many years to 
come”way, track workers could be alerted to the 
approach of a train within a known fixed time.
However, for GNSS to work reliably there needs 
to be clear ‘line of sight’ from trains to satellites, 
which may be prevented by bridges, tunnels, 
cuttings and on sub surface lines. GNSS also 
presents a potential problem in that neither the 
infrastructure manager nor the train operator 
will have any control over the availability of 
the GNSS signal.
Remote condition monitoring 
Track circuits will still be used for many years to 
come, not least because of the massive task of 
replacing life-expired signalling some networks, 
so clever asset management and maintenance 
techniques will be required. One initiative that has 
helped reliability is remote condition monitoring 
(RCM). By monitoring the track circuit current, 
potential failure modes can be predicted and 
interventions planned before failure occurs. It is 
not something that is easy to automate, but there 
have been consequential improvements in track 
circuit reliability, with potentially more to come.
One recent innovation involving the use of RCM 
allows new jointless track circuits to be inspected 
in real time from remote locations, thus improving 
reliability. Prior to its implementation, track 
circuits had to be checked on site using digital 
multi-meters, which was a time-consuming 
task and not conducive to finding faults before 
they occurred. Axle-counter systems also have 
sophisticated built-in remote diagnostics, and this 
is one example of the digital railway delivering 
results today. 
Conclusion
The development of train detection systems 
has been driven by need, accident and available 
technology. Increasingly we are seeing the use 
of train-based location systems, but track-based 
systems will continue to be important for many 
railways around the world. 
Both of the major methods of track-based train 
detection, namely track circuits and axle counters, 
have their supporters and detractors. However, 
for now at least, axle counters are used more than 
track circuits for new signalling systems.
Have you got an idea for a future ‘back 
to basics’ article? Perhaps an area of 
command, control, signalling and 
telecoms engineering that you’d like to 
understand better. 
Could you share your experience of these 
topics with the next generation? If you could 
contribute to a future article do let us know, 
email editor@irsenews.co.uk and we will be 
happy to consider your ideas.“For GNSS to 
work reliably 
there needs to 
be clear ‘line of 
sight’ from trains 
to satellites”