IRSE / 
Institution Of Railway Signal Engineers
Train detection

the basics
Paul Darlington and David Fenner
This, second ofa series ofarticles on 'back
These solutions are sometimes used in
to basics' themes; looks at the essentials
combination to achieve the required degree
Oftrain detection (or more accurately, as
Of positionalaccuracy, and
may also be
we shall see; train absence detection). One
supplemented by equipment such as track-based
ofthe main safety requirements ofa train
balises or RFID (radio frequency identification) tags
control systems is the need to know it is safe
to periodically correct incremental positioning
to establish a route and provide movement
errors. Train-borne positioning systems are a
authority fora train. In particular, before
standard feature of modern CBTC systems (which
points or other moveable infrastructure
often use moving block technology) and Will be
has its position changed ora train is given
for ERTMS Level 3 as well. We will explore this
permission to proceed, the relevant part
subject further laterin this article。
ofthe line has to be proved to be clear of
Alltrain-borne positioning systems rely upon
other trains. Thus, the ability to detect the
some form oftrain to track communication
presence ofa train ona
particular stretch of
system so that the interlocking is regularly
track is a
requirement
modern train
provided with up-to-date information about
control. The principles of train detection will
the train location. This may be a radio system,
"There are tWo
be very familiar to experienced signalling
or a short-range communication system such
engineers, and so this article is intended for
as inductive loops in the track, Wi-Fi, or leaky
main types of
members new to the industry。
feeder
technology:
technology
There are currently two main types oftrain
Despite the growth of train-based technologies。
generally
detection system, namely the track circuit and
for the majority of railways around the world that
used for train
the axle counter. Both of them use track-based
use train detection systems, the track circuit and
technology, and although other track-based
the axle counter continue to be the favoured
detection
solutions have been trialled over the years
solutions. There are; of course; also many railways
(including mass detectors, infrared and optical
Which use little or no train detection technology
detectors)
none of these have been widely
and rely instead on 'absolute block' methods of
adopted. We Will look at both track circuits and
working or 'train orders' (verbal communication
axle counters in some detail in this article:
between the control centre and the train drivers)
An alternative approach is to use train-based
technology, Whereby the train determines its
Trackcircuits
location and communicates this information to
The track circuit was originally used simply to
the interlocking and control centre on
regular
remind signallers that a train was present on
basis using a reliable secure communication link.
particular section oftrack;
notas an integral part
Various technical options exist, including:
ofthe
locking of points and signals. It was the
development of the track circuit that enabled the
Satellite positioning (Global Navigation Satellite
full potential of 'space interval' signalling based
Systems
GNSS).
on track circuit block principles (continuous train
Odometry (counting wheel revolutions)
detection between signal boxes). It also enabled
Video (by recognition of
signals to be provided that worked automatically
infrastructure features) _
With the passage oftrains。
Proprietary systems offered, in particular,
The track circuit continuously proves the absence
by Communication-Based Train Control
Ofa train from
given section oftrackin
a fail-
(CBTC) suppliers。
safe manner. It cannot prove the presence of a
18
TO
BAGK
BASICS
they
for
key

IRSE News
Issue 261
December 2019
Train Wheel
Set
Insulated
Rail Joints
(IRJs)
Detector
Electrical
(relay and
SOUrCe
repeater
(feed)
circuit)
Figure 1 - The
train, since almost any failure mode will give the
energised, and so it changes to the 'de-energised'
fundamental principles
same indication as if a train is present. By positively
state. This state change informs the signalling
ofthe track circuit are
proving the absence ofatrain,
a track circuit can
system that the track is 'occupied'。
simple. A train travelling
be used to confirm that it is safe to set
a routeand
betweenan electrical
Any electrical short-circuit between the rails,
source and detector
permit a train to proceed. The track circuit should
whether caused bya train ornot
Orany
shorts out the current
not be confused with a 'rail circuit', whichis used
disconnection within the circuit (for example a
flowing between them
for non-fail-safe applications to positively prove
cable being cut or falling off the rail), or a loss
and the loss of current
the presence ofa train.
at the detector indicates
Of supply current
Will cause the track circuit to
that the absence of trains
Fundamental design principles of
inform the signalling system it is occupied_
This
can no longer beassured
track circuits
means that virtually any equipment fault will cause
More modern devices use
the system to 'fail safe' and thereby maintain
coded, typical shift-keyed,
The most basic track circuit consists ofa source
signals at red. Although safe; this behaviour can
signals to offer more
of electrical energy (a direct current
DC), fed
result in unreliability, especially if the track circuit is
immunity to complex
throughan impedance and along the rails to a
not set up or maintained correctly
Atrack circuit
traction systems
boundary which is defined by a pair of Insulated
operating device
'clips') can also be used to
Rail Joints (IRJs are provided at both ends of the
protect
a train in an emergency. Correct operation
track circuit to define the detection limits ofthe
of a track circuit also depends upon
good
track circuit). At the boundary
a detection device
electrical contact between
train's wheels and the
typically
relay, is connected across the rails and
rails, together with
continuous low-impedance
is energised by the direct current provided there is
path between each Wheel via the connecting axle
no train present (see Figure 1).
on the train. This Will be discussed later。
Thus, the track circuit confirms the absence ofa
DCACand coded track circuits
train to the signalling system (track circuit clear)。
The presence f metal wheels and axles ofa train
Simple as the track circuit may seem, there
within the track circuit boundaries wWill cause the
are Various ways of powering the system and
rails to be 'short circuited ' The increased current
detecting the state of the track circuit (occupied or
flOW results in
greater volt
through the feed
Clear),and all have their benefits and weaknesses
impedance Which, together with the shunting
The source of electrical energy may beany of
effect of the short circuit,
means the detector no
DC, AC at power frequencies (typically 5OHZ),
longer sees sufficient electrical energy to remain
AC at audio frequencies (a few thousand Hz),
Bombardier's EBI Track
400 is typical of modern
BOMBAROIER
BOMBARDIER
BOMBAROIER
microprocessor-based
EBITrack 400
EBI Track 400
STFP SFTTING
EBITrack 400
track circuits that Use
Transmitter
coded waveforms to
Output
Transmitter
Module
Receiver
provide traction immunity
and can operate without
Next
insulated rail joints
+48
Photo Bombardier
OK
OK
0P2
TPI
48R
D
Back
Back
TMI
TM1
TM2
TM2
RLt
Rl
19
(e.9.
drop
Next

IRSE News
Issue 261
December 2019
In many temperate
series ofimpulses or complex waveforms
testing currently has to be carried out manually,
climates autumn leaf fall
including digital codes. Similarly, the detector may
putting staff out on the railway and therefore
can cause contamination
be a simple relay,an AC 'vane' relay ora more
placing them at risk, as wellas beingan expensive
onthe rail head,and
complex receiver tuned to a particular frequency
and time-consuming use of resources。
unreliable shunting of
track circuits
or pattern of signals. It should be noted that the
high volume of conductive metalin a rail results
Rust flms and contaminants
in
high inductance and thus track circuits With
The resistance through the train's Wheels and axles
high frequency component tend to be short in
is also an important factor, as it is the train Which
length. Some track circuits can also act as a carrier
shorts out the track circuit. There are several ways
for coded signals that are passed to the train。
in which the resistance of this short circuit may
These are usually associated with ATP and early
increase, with detrimental effect on operation。
ATO systems, and examples include TVM43O, the
One way is the presence of a rust film on the
original ATP system used on French
High-Speed
"Tread-braked
rail head or wheel. The mechanical strength of
lines, and the original implementation of ATP with
trains can
ATO on the London Underground Victoria line:
light rust films is much reduced by the presence
Of moisture; when the contaminant tends to
sometimes give
The two rails on
railway are in practice not
be squeezed out from the wheellrail contact
a better track
perfectly insulated from each other There is
patch. Therefore; lightly rusted rails Will only
Circuit shunt than
alwayS a
leakage path between the two through
be a problem when dry. Very heavy rust from
the rail fixings, the sleepers, the ballast and
prolonged disuse of the track, orafter re-
modern disc-
the ground itself. This is known as the ballast
railing with new rail, can result in track circuits
braked trains"
resistance. Its Value is dependent upon the
being incapable of detecting trains, especially
condition ofany rail insulation, the cleanliness of
lightweight trains as
are not heavy enough to
the ballast, and the prevailing weather conditions
penetrate the layer of rust. Therefore, care needs
It is inversely proportional to track circuit length。
to be taken after track relaying, when track circuits
High ballast resistance values are ideal for a
should not be restored to full operation until a
track circuit and may be obtained in dry/clean
good electrically conductive surface has been
conditions Or
during frosty weather, but wet
created.One positive result from today's crowded
conditions may reduce the value significantly,
railway on some routes is that
lines have little
especially Where there is bad drainage andlor
chance to rust, reducing the problem. However,
contamination from conductive materials in the
seldom-used branch lines; particularly in coastal
track-bed. So, if for instance the track is flooded,
regions where rust formation is exacerbated by
the track circuit Will show occupied and the signal
salt, are at risk。
controlling the track section Will remain at red.
Other contaminants that increase the electrical
Wet tunnels, sea walls and similar locations can be
resistance between the rails and the train's wheels
particular problem, as the conditions can vary
can cause the same problems. Those associated
significantly on
frequent basis
Which means that
With falling leaves are generally limited to the
the track circuits need to be repeatedly adjusted
autumn,and are usually confined to known
to keep them working reliably and safely。
locations, which may include built-Up areas
One difficulty With adjusting track circuits is
Leaves are drawn into the wheel-rail interface by
knowing the prevailing value of ballast resistance。
the passage of a train Where they are squashed
Ifa track circuit fails due to wet weather, it may
into a pulp. This contaminates both the rail
be possible to remedy the situation by reducing
and Wheel causing Wheel-slip problems When
the feed impedance. However
a too low feed
Wet, and significantly increasing the electrical
impedance can lead to trains not being detected
resistance When dry.
(a 'wrong side failure'). This Will occur when
a IOW
Reasonably
weather with little wind Will cause
feed impedance allows enough energy to reach
the leaves to fall gradually over a longer period,
the detector despite a train standing on the track。
and
Will be reasonably sap-free When they
Some track circuits With highly variable ballast
do fall. But high wind conditions will lead to
conditions may need frequent, often seasonal
sudden fall of sap-laden leaves, giving rise to the
adjustment to avoid this risk. This adjustment and
Worst conditions
20
they
busy
dry
they

IRSE News
Issue 261
December 2019
Problems with coal dust and other similar
Will cause the track circuit to show occupied.
contaminants on the rail head tend to be confined
Therefore, apart from the insulated rail joints or
to collieries and other loading/unloading areas。
block joints used to electrically separate sections
Sand contamination can also be
problem,
of line; the reliable operation of track circuits also
"Direct metallic
although not so much due to seaside locations;
requires the provision of insulators to stop other
connection
but with slow-moving locomotives using
track components shorting out the track circuit。
excessive amounts of sand foradhesion purposes
between the
In each of these cases, the effect is similar to
At a set of
points, for example; there are many
rails Will cause
heavy rust
Problems can also occur with ballast
Cross-rail connections
stretcher bars, point
condition issues associated with carbon-based
motors and heating elements
allof which
the track circuit
need to be insulated, giving rise to quite
contaminants, and of course heavy rain causing
to Show as
puddles and floods can short out the track circuits:
complex insulating and bonding arrangements_
occupied"
In addition, the actual running rails cross at the
Trainissues
'frog' or 'heel' ofthe points, requiring insulated
Where a thin film of contaminant insulates the
rail joints and bonding in the switch rails to
wheel from the rail, this can often be pierced if
transfer the polarity of the circuit to the other rail.
there is
rough surface on the
running face of the
Designing track circuits to work reliably and safely
wheel. The older style of tread brakes caused the
through complex switches and crossings can be
wheel tyres to be cleaned and roughened at each
quite a challenge!
brake application, whereas more modern disc-
Concrete sleepers incorporate a rubber
under
braked trains do not
and the tyres may be rolled
the rail foot and moulded insulations where the
into a
smooth surface condition_
Therefore
fixings bear on the top of the foot
These increase
older tread-braked trains generally provided
ballast resistance to levels significantly higher than
Insulated
better track circuit operation than modern
can be obtained with timber sleepers. However
rail joints are
disc-braked trains
the insulations can erode due to the Vibration
expensive; both
Similarly, the axle weight has an effect, as
heavy
of passing traffic and, consequently, require
to install and to
load will pierce a film more easily. Again, modern
inspection and periodical replacement
another
lightweight trains, which are designed to minimise
maintenance overhead. Steel sleepers are even
maintain"
track wear, cause more track circuit problems than
more ofa problem.
are also insulated, of
old-style heavy locomotive hauled trains。
course; but any degradation of that insulation Will
result in severe problems.
To assist Vehicles to shunt track circuits
a device
known as the
Track Circuit Assister' (TCA)is
Ultimately the maximum length of a track circuit
sometimes fitted to modern trains in Britain
Will be limited by the achievable ballast resistance,
to induce an electrical potential between the
its variability With prevailing environmental
wheelset and the rail head and thereby break
conditions, and the level of reliability required。
down any insulating film. Typically, a TCA consists
It Will also be influenced by interference from
ofa control unit and aerial with associated tuning
electric traction, Which is discussed below.In the
The black art of bonding
unit
mounted between
pair of wheelsets close
UKit would be reasonable to assume that these
inareas With track circuits
to the rails. These devices tend to be fitted to the
factors limit a track circuit to a maximum ofabout
and third-rail traction is
end bogies ofthe train because it is important;
I50Om, although isolated examples of longer
Very visible in this view
especially around point work, that the extremities
ones can be found
of Clapham Junctionin
of the train are detected so that the points cannot
South London, UK. Look
be inadvertently moved at the wrong time_
Bonding
out for impedance bonds
traction cross-bonds,and
Bonding is the means by which the individual
track circuit bondingin
Insulation
components of the railway track are connected
this photo.
As has been described,any direct metallic
together electrically for track circuit purposes。
Photo Shutterstock/
connection between the two rails will be
The term also includes the additional electrical
lan Stewart。
interpreted by the track circuit as
a trainand
connections necessary for the proper operation
JS0 SL
707019
21
pad
Very
They

IRSE News
Issue 261
December 2019
ofelectric traction. Fora track circuit to fail
frequency but no other. It is possible; With careful
safe (show occupied) in the event of a bonding
design, to arrange a short overlap in the centre
disconnection, it is necessary to bond all elements
ofthe tuned zone where both track circuits are
ofthe track circuit in series, so that any one
effectively shunted.
failure breaks the circuit. In practice; in switches
The use of audio frequency track circuits is not
and crossings it may not be physically possible to
always a practicable solution for complex switch
arrange series bonding of every
Ofevery rail。
and crossing layouts, not least because of the
Later in the article We Will deal with single rail
complication of significant rail impedances
traction
bonding (which only provides series
associated With parallel bonding:
bonding for the track circuit signal railas the
traction return is usually bonded in parallel
Brokenrails
with other traction return paths); and 'double
By their very nature of operation track circuits
rail traction bonding' (providing total series
are sometimes
regarded as a means of detecting
"Audio-frequency
bonding for
a track Circuit as well as both rails
broken rails. However, track circuits Will only
track circuits can
for the traction return path). In the majority of
detect a broken rail that is fractured all the way
be unsuitable
Cases traction
bonding through switches and
throughand is not bridged by any form of bonding
unless the point
Crossings is single rail traction Where track
or other electrical connection. So, a damaged
Circuits are provided。
rail head or foot will not be detected but could
Work is very
be equally problematic.On an electrified railway
simple"
Insulated railjoints
the need to maintain
traction current return
IRJs are expensive; both to install and to maintain
path through one of the rails and other paralleled
especially on tracks subjected to high speed, high
conductive infrastructure means that in many
axle-Weight traffic or where there is an intensive
cases breaks can only be detected in the other rail.
service:
A rail joint also presents an increased risk
Hence broken rail detection is, at least in the UK
ofrail fracture; although now with factory made
now managed by the routine monitoring of the
six-hole glued joints this is less ofa risk than With
rail condition
including ultrasound scanning, not
older styles of IRJ.As mentioned above;
are
by dependence upon track circuits. And of course;
also required in areas of points and crossings,
as We shall see; axle counters are ofno
atall
which makes the railway less physically robust
with broken rail detection
than track engineers would wish。
Electric traction
It is also possible for the insulation in the IRJ to be
Below left: Rail breaks are
On electrified railways, track circuits must operate
rarely as Clear-cut as this
compromised, either by failure or by burring of the
despite large traction return currents passing
example; and not allrail
top of the rail such that it bridges the insulating
along the same rails_
The disparity is substantial,
breaks will be detected by
element
This could cause
wrong side failure
with AC traction currents of 3OOAor moreand
track circuits
but no rail
because one track circuit supplies powerto the
breaks will be detected by
detection element of the next track circuit
aCross
DC traction operating at up to 70OOA. These
axle counters。
Values exclude traction fault conditions and are far
the failed IRJ. For this reason, most simple DC and
Photo Shutterstock/
larger than the track circuit currents Whichare a
low frequency AC track circuits connect to the
Michael715。
few amps at most
This gives rise to the concept
rails with opposite polarities either side of the IRJ
ofAC immune and DC immune track circuits_
Below right: The
to ensure that, should the insulation fail both track
There are also some areas that have both forms
introduction of
circuits Will show occupied.
oftraction current supply Which therefore require
new or different
stock on areas Where
One solution for
avoiding IRJs is the use of
dual immunity.
train detection is a
audio frequency AC track circuits Which permit
The initial way of providing immunity was to use
significant part of the
the physical limits ofan individual track circuit
DC track circuits in AC territory and AC phase
signalling system requires
to be defined by 'tuned' zone, rather than by
detailed analysis of the
sensitive vane relay track circuits in DC traction
insulators in the rails. Adjacent and parallel track
susceptibility of the
territory. Where both types of traction were in
circuits operate at different audio frequencies
trackside equipment to
Use it Was not unusual to use a locally generated
large traction currents
and each one is designed to detect its own track
special frequency to power AC track circuits, such
Photo Hitachi。
|唧
22
part
they
help
any
rolling

IRSE News
Issue 261
December 2019
Axle counters are
as 83.33H2 using rotary converters_
This enabled
short-term imbalance; which is why track circuits
increasingly preferred as
the track circuits to detect and respond to the
on electrified lines are normally designed to be
a less intrusive means of
83.33H2 frequency but not DC or SOHZAC.
Slow to energise (i.e. slow to show track clear).
train detection。
Photo Thales_
Today, Whilst these arrangements are still
In DC electrified areas, the relatively low supply
common, there is
steady increase in the use of
Voltage results in high currents returning to the
modulated audio frequency track circuits selected
sub-stations via the running rails.In order to
forimmunity. This move is partly the result of the
minimise voltage drop and consequential power
application of three phase traction drives, Which
losses in the DC-traction supply, all running
produce many harmonics some of whichare
rails are used for the return of traction currents
present in the traction return currents
In practice
wherever possible, and therefore double- rail track
the range of frequencies produced by modern
circuits are used
There is usually cross bonding
three phase traction units makes it a challenge to
between different tracks as well so that the current
find immune frequencies suitable for track circuits
has as many feed and return paths as possible;
This is also one of the reasons Why there is a
again to minimise traction energy losses. As in AC
trend to Use axle counters as the modern form of
areas, impedance bonds are used to ensure the
train detection.
traction current has a return
to the SUb-
station, Whilst the adjacent train detection sections
"Coded track
Track circuit arrangements in electrified areas
are kept separate from each other. In switches and
Circuits can be
are constrained by the need to ensure safe and
Crossings, however, it is not usually possible to
reliable operation of both signalling and traction
used to transmit
bond the track in double-rail form,and therefore
systems. This means that the track circuit must be
single-rail track circuits must be installed. It should
information to a
immune to both false operation and to damage
be noted that 'single rail' track circuit really means
moving train"
by the flow oftraction currents through the rails
single rail traction current return, as both rails are
This also causes complications because, While
still used by the track circuit
the signalling track circuits are separated from
each other by IRJs, the traction current needs
In AC overhead electrified areas, traction currents
a continuous electrical connection back to
are generally lower than in DC systems and,in
the substation_
many cases, single rail traction return is sufficient
for electrification purposes
However, increased
This problem has led to the use of impedance
traffic levels and alternative feeding arrangements
bonds on double rail traction track circuits_
These
may sometimes require that both running rails are
are devices that present a low impedance to
used for traction return。
traction currentand
higher impedance to track
Circuit current. In simple terms,
allow traction
Codedtrack circuits
current to pass along the rails and around the
Coded track Circuits can be used to transmit
IRJs, but stop the track circuit currents in order to
information to
moving train。
The amount of
separate one track circuit from the next。
information that can be communicated is limited
Although track circuits are designed to be immune
to simple messages; for example transmitting
to false operation (wrong side failure) from the
one ofa small number of modulations (14-20)
presence of traction currents flowing in the rails,
to send maximum safe speed and target speed
any significant imbalance in the amount of current
combination
Such systems can require extensive
flowing in the two rails may be misinterpreted by
lineside equipment for each track circuit
the track circuit detector as indicating that the
especially on bi-directionally signalling lines
For
track is unoccupied When it is not. In particularany
the train to successfully detect the transmitted
fast change in the traction current may cause a
information before it is shorted out by the train
23
path
they

IRSE News
Issue 261
December 2019
wheels it must always run towards the transmitter
One particular advantage of axle counters over
end of the track Circuit. ThUS,
on bidirectional lines
track circuits is that they can be overlaid on
it is necessary to switch the feed and detector
another detection system (whether track circuits
(relay) ends of the track circuit depending on
oranother axle counter system)
during
a re
the direction of travel of the signalled train. This
signalling, thus enabling the new detection system
added complexity and the consequentially greater
to be tested and proved to be operational before
failure risk is one of the reasons that modern
itis required to control the railway. Compare this
train supervision systems are generally moving
With track circuits where only one track circuit can
away from coded track circuits to radio-based
be installed ona section of track at a time。
communication systems。
Axle counters are not without their problems
Axle counters
however. An axle-counter section cannot be
made 'occupied' by the use ofatrack-circuit
As its name suggests, an axle counter system used
operating device to protect a train,
norWill
"One particular
track-mounted equipment to count axles entering
an axle-counter
system detecta broken rail。
and leaving a track section. This information is
advantage of axle
evaluated to determine whether the track section
However, the introduction of train radio for
emergency communications has provided an
counters over
is occupied or clear: They perhaps
should
acceptable alternative to the use of track circuit
track circuits is
be more accurately called wheel counters, since
operating clips, and as referred to earlier
a track
the device attached to the rail uses
magnetic
that
Can
circuit is not regarded as a reliable means of
field to detect the passage of the rim and flange
be overlaid
ofa Wheel
But because on most rail vehicles
detecting
a broken rail。
onanother
the Wheel is connected to an axle with another
More significantly, when an axle-counter system
wheelon the opposite side;
are called axle
fails it loses track of how many axles have passed
detection
counters. Each axle counter head usually has two
through it since the failure occurred. Therefore;
system
detectors on the rail, so the direction of travel
for safety, it is designed so that when the failure
can be identified. The head is connected toan
is fixed, it shows the section of line as being
evaluator which counts the number of wheels that
occupied, unlike a track circuit。
section then
pass
To make
a train detection section two heads
needs to be proved clear ofa train before the axle
are connected to one evaluator, denoting the
counters can be reset and restored to operational
ends of the train detection section
One counts
USe, Which can take some time
the Wheels that enter the section and the other
Another problem with axle counters is that a
subtracts the Wheels that have left the section. If
right-side failure can occur when
a Wheel stops
the answeris zero the track section is deemed to
directly above the inductive sensor; known as
be clear oftrains_
Note that because both heads
'Wheel rock'. When the train leaves there is ahigh
can tell the direction of travel, both can eitheradd
risk the section Will remain occupied with no
or subtract from the total. Typically, one head can
train present and the time-
consuming process
communicate With two evaluators, meaning one
Ofreset and restore has to be carried out That
head is used both to count axles exiting from one
section and entering the next。
can cause difficulties at a busy station, especially
if the platform is configured for multiple short
As can be seen from the above description axle
trains stopped at various ocations
the same
counters depend on the equipment being able
platform_
these reasons
some sections of
to count and store in memory the number of
railway
Thameslink in the UK) have decided to
wheels that have passed. Such
technology, as
retain track circuits Where there are multiple split
wellas the communication between the three
sections along the platforms。
elements ofthe system, is much easier with
modern computing systems and this explains
Cab signalling systems
the relatively recent increase in their use in some
Modern signalling has a greater dependence on
parts of the world. Other reasons for adoption are
train-borne systems and communications, with
are Very largely (although not completely)
CBTC becoming the dominant form for metro
immune to traction current interference; there is
lines
These systems rely on the train regularly
no limitation on section length, so especially on
reporting its location and other information to the
rural routes the volume of trackside equipment
control centre; for which ofcourse i
requires
and associated power supplies becomes much
reliable communication link
Wi-Fi or data enabled
smaller; and
are not influenced by rail head
radio (e.9.4G/LTE) are used for the ground to train
Or ballast resistance conditions.In addition
communications, with 4GILTE now becoming
the traction supply engineer is able to design
favoured due to availability concerns with Wi-Fi.
the traction return system including all the
Together with the use of ATP and ATO, theseare
CrOSS
bonding required, as wellas the track
the
reasons Why capacity can be increased
earthing connections for AC traction, without
On metro routes
the constraints of track circuit
application rules_
ETCS is the equivalent of CBTC for main line
Finally, there is no requirement for an IRJ or block
railways. However, enabling a main line train to
joint which increases the integrity of the track
define its position accurately is a greater challenge
systemand reduces Costs. Axle counters are now
than is the case With metros (the latter invariably
the preferred method of train detection forall
new schemes in Great Britain and in many other
having fixed formation trains) . Whilst the leading
Vehicle of atrain may be able to inform the
countries throughout the world。
control centre of its locationand movement, it
is much more difficult to confirm the location
24
they
they
they
The
along
For
(e.9.
they
they
key

IRSE News
Issue 261
December 2019
ofthe rear ofthe train (unless the train is a fixed
way, track workers could be alerted to the
formation). In particular it is difficult to confirm
approach of a train within
a known fixed time
that the train is still complete i.e.
no vehicles have
However, for GNSS to work reliably there needs
been left behind due to detachment (known as
to be clear 'line of sight' from trains to satellites
train integrity'). The lost wagon or coach on a
Which may be prevented by bridges; tunnels;
locomotive hauled train remains a
significant
cuttings and on sub surface lines. GNSS also
challenge for main line railways。
Thus, although
presents a potential problem in that neither the
ETCS level 2 can be operated without lineside
For GNSSto
infrastructure manager nor the train operator
signals; it still uses trackside train detection based
Will have any control over the availability of
Work reliably
on track circuits oraxle counters_
the GNSS signal.
there needs to
ETCS level 3 is the conceptual system that
be Clear 'line of
Will enable trackside train detection to
finally
Remote condition monitoring
sight' from trains
be removed on main line railways, but When
Track circuits Will still be used for many years to
We Will see i
deployed extensively is an open
come
not least because of the massive task of
to satellites"
question
The option of ETCS hybrid level 3 is one
replacing life-expired signalling some networks,
way of gaining some of the benefits of Level 3
So clever asset management and maintenance
Whilst avoiding the train integrity problem. In
techniques Will be required. One initiative that has
hybrid level 3, fixed formation trains such as
helped reliability is remote condition monitoring
multiple units, Which can easily be confirmed
(RCM). By monitoring the track circuit current
to be complete; are allowed to operate at
potential failure modes can be predicted and
level 3 whereas others (loco hauled freight and
interventions planned before failure oCCUrs.It is
passenger trains) are operated in level 2. Thus, the
not something that is easy to automate; but there
infrastructure is equipped with train detection, but
have been consequential improvements in track
more than one level 3 train may occupy a given
circuit reliability, with potentially more to come。
train detection sectionat a time. Furthermore; if
One recent innovation involving the use of RCM
the trains that are operating in level 2 in
hybrid
allows new jointless track circuits to be inspected
level 3 area are
sufficiently infrequent, it may be
in real time from remote locations
thus improving
possible to have longer train detection sections
reliability. Prior to its implementation, track
and thus less trackside equipment on such lines。
circuits had to be checked on site using digital
ETCS standards currently specify that trains
multi-meters, Which Was a time-consuming
identify their location
combination
task and not conducive to finding faults before
of balise reference points and tachometry,
occurred. Axle-counter systems also have
supplemented by Doppler radar. However, there is
sophisticated built-in remote diagnostics, and this
no fundamental reason why this information could
is one example of the digital railway delivering
not be generated from Global Navigation Satellite
results today。
Systems (GNSS) such as GPS, or video tracking and
position identification, provided it can be proven
Conclusion
to meet the
appropriate Safety Integrity Level (SIL)。
The development of train detection systems
has been driven by need, accident and available
Even in fulllevel 3 areas, some track-based train
technology. Increasingly we are seeing the use
detection is still usually considered essential
of train-based location systems, but track-based
in locations where moveable infrastructure
systems will continue to be important for many
especially points, require locking. The provision
railways around the world.
of some track-based train detection may
also help recovery to normal operations after
Both of the major methods of track-based train
an ETCS failure
detection, namely track circuits and axle counters,
have their supporters and detractors. However,
GNSSand Positive Train Control (PTC)
fornow at least
axle counters are Used more than
"Track Circuits
In the US, systems using GNSS are being
track circuits for new signalling systems。
Will still be used
introduced as part of the requirement to introduce
for many years to
Positive Train Control (PTC) over some 60 000
miles of railways_
The challenge of installing PTC
come'
is further complicated by the fact that there are
ten different systems in use across the US. Some
systems use satellite links for train separation
Have yoU
anidea for a future 'back
and were
designed for areas of 'dark territory'
to basics' article? Perhaps anarea of
Where line-side signals and train detection are not
command, control signalling and
provided and instead trains are controlled by train
telecoms engineering that you'd like to
orders and track warrants_
understand better。
As well as train location, GNSS based systems can
Could you share your experience of these
also be used for passenger information both on
topics with the next generation? Ifyou could
trainsand at stations_
A further possible use of
contribute to
future article do let Us know,
GNSS is to trigger the warning on the approach
email editor@irsenews.co.ukand We will be
to
a leVel
crossing With a constant-time lapse
happy to consider your ideas:
regardless ofthe speed ofthe train.In a similar
25
using
they
got