16
Francis HowBack to basics: Interlocking 
Part 1
This, the third in a series of articles on ‘back 
to basics’ themes, looks at the essentials of ‘interlocking’. Interlocking is central to railway signalling, as it ensures that the components of a signalling system act together in a manner which is safe for the routing and movement of trains. Whole books could be written about the subject, and this article is no more than an introduction, intended for IRSE members new to the industry rather than those who are experienced in specifying, designing and testing signalling systems.
This article focuses primarily on the technology 
used for interlocking. Next month there will be a further article, in which we will look at the 
functionality of an interlocking – what it actually 
does in practice. 
What is interlocking?
If you ask a signal engineer about interlocking, they may well point to an equipment room full of relays, or a cabinet of computer equipment 
in a control centre, or perhaps even some 
complicated-looking arrangement of metalwork underneath a lever frame in a signal box. It is true that all these things are ‘interlockings’, but 
‘interlocking’ is defined as a feature of a control 
system that makes the state of two functions mutually dependent. In the context of railway signalling, interlocking is used to keep trains safe from collision and derailment. The primary 
purposes of these interlocking features are 
to ensure that:
1. Bef ore a train is given authority to move along 
a section of track from one signal to the next:
• points are in the correct position (to avoid derailment),
• there are no trains already on the track (to avoid collision), and
• no conflicting train movements are already authorised (also to avoid collision).2. When a train has been given authority to move:
• points in the section of track are prevented from being moved, and
• other trains are prevented from entering the same section of track.
 until the train has passed thr ough the 
section of route.
There is more to interlocking than this, as we shall see, but this is the essence of what it is all about.
What does interlocking not do?
Interlocking does not check that everything is safe 
for the passage of a train. A section of railway track must be safe for the passage of trains in many 
other ways as well. For instance, the distance 
between the rails must be correct, the track-bed must be capable of supporting the weight of a train, and the train’s cross-sectional dimensions 
(the dynamic envelope) must be compatible with 
the positioning of items such as platforms and bridges, so that the train will not hit them. These can also cause collision or derailment – but 
they are not generally the concern of the signal 
engineer. Railway engineers have other methods 
for ensuring the integrity of these other features upon which train safety depends.
Interlocking safety
Interlocking functions (such as moving a set of points or clearing a signal) must be executed only when it is safe to do so. Industrial control systems 
(of which railway signalling is an example) are 
designed to meet a specified ‘safety integrity level’ (SIL). There are five such levels, from 0 to 4, and the interlocking functions in a modern main line or 
metro railway signalling system must usually meet 
SIL 4 requirements – the highest level possible. This means the likelihood of an unsafe failure is incredibly small. 
The underlying safety principle traditionally 
associated with railway signalling, and particularly with the interlocking, is known as the ‘fail-safe’ 
“Interlocking 
does not check 
that everything is safe for the passage of a train”
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
17
principle. This means that if an interlocking system 
develops a fault, it is designed so that it will fail in a manner which stops trains, by putting signals 
to danger. This fail-safe property is achieved in 
various ways, including the use of inherently fail-safe components, the design of the interlocking logic, and the system architecture. 
It is important to note that ‘fail-safe’ does not 
mean that the signalling of trains is 100% safe. This is partly because in practice the occurrence of unsafe failures cannot be completely eliminated, 
and partly because if trains have been stopped 
by a (safe) failure of the signalling system, the movement of trains then depends largely upon the application of operational procedures, with the 
associated risk of human error.
Not all parts of a signalling system need to be 
ultra-safe. In modern systems the use of high integrity (SIL 4) design techniques is usually 
restricted to those parts of the system which are 
essential for safety – including the interlocking functionality. Other parts, such as the control panel or desk, are usually of a lower integrity 
(typically SIL 0 to SIL 2). You might wonder why 
we do not design all parts of the signalling system to achieve SIL 4 levels of safety. The answer is that designing systems to meet high levels of safety integrity is complex, time-consuming 
and expensive, and can lead to lower levels 
of reliability. 
A little history…
When railways first appeared, they had no signalling in the form that we would recognise today. The concept of a signal box did not exist, 
signals were very rudimentary (originally just a 
man with a flag), and giving permission for a train to enter a section of track relied simply upon allowing sufficient time for the preceding train to have left the section – without any knowledge of 
whether in practice it had done so!
Not surprisingly, it didn’t take long for accidents 
to demonstrate the need for safer ways of 
controlling the movement of trains. This article 
does not explore the evolution of railway signalling, but there were some key milestones in its development which are worth noting. One was the introduction of the electric telegraph, so 
that someone at one end of section of railway line 
could communicate with someone at the other end. This eliminated the need for ‘time interval working’ by enabling the person controlling entry 
to a section of line to receive positive confirmation 
when the whole of the preceding train had left the section and therefore the line was again ‘clear’. 
A second crucial development was the 
introduction of the signal box, to enable signals 
and points to be controlled from one place. Previously the setting up of a route for a train had relied upon people walking about on the track to 
move points and operate signals. Centralisation 
of these activities was not only more efficient and reduced the possibility of misunderstanding, it also facilitated the introduction of ‘interlocking’ – mechanical equipment in the signal box that 
helped to prevent mistakes being made by 
the signaller when moving points or operating signals. Even in the age of computerisation, it is remarkable to look back at how railway engineers 
of the 19th century invented mechanical logic 
systems that largely overcame the risk of human error when signalling trains.
So, the way was paved for the introduction 
of ‘interlocking’ according to a defined set of 
principles or rules – which for the most part still apply today, albeit they vary in some respects from railway to railway. 
Figure 1 – The 
Chippenham, UK, factory 
of Westinghouse Brake & Saxby Signal Company in 1927. Some 60 years after the invention of the interlocking skilled teams were still assembling complex lever frames – some of which are still in use today.Photo WB&S Archive/Chippenham Museum & Heritage Centre.
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
18
Interlocking technologies
Mechanical interlocking
The earliest form of interlocking was purely 
mechanical. Signal boxes were usually two storey buildings, with the signaller working upstairs 
and the interlocking downstairs. To allow a 
train to move, the signaller would operate large levers, separate ones being provided for each set of points and for each signal. These levers 
were directly connected via mechanical rods 
and/or wires to the points and signals outside, and therefore could require considerable effort to move. 
On the ground floor of the signal box, underneath 
the levers, was an arrangement of metal bars that were connected to the levers, with other bars at right-angles to the first. The physical interlocking 
of the two sets of bars prevented the signaller 
from moving a lever unless other levers were in the correct position. So, for instance, he could not move a signal lever to allow a train to move unless the relevant points levers were in the 
correct position. Gradually engineers began to introduce simple 
electro-mechanical locking in combination with the mechanical locking, to prevent a lever from being moved unless its electric lock was energised. Energisation of the lock (via an 
electrical circuit) required other levers to be 
electrically proved to be in the correct position. Further conditions were progressively added to the lock circuits to improve safety, such as the 
requirement for relevant track circuits to be clear 
before a signal or set of points could be moved. 
Safety features were also added to the block 
systems that controlled the movement of trains 
between neighbouring signal boxes, to prevent a 
signaller from sending a train from the area that he controlled to that of the next signal box unless it was safe to do so. 
Mechanically interlocked signal boxes are still in 
use on railways in many parts of the world, well over 125 years since they were introduced.
1
Locking nibsConnecting
barTappet connected
to Lever 1Tappet connected
to Lever 4
1 4 4
4 11
Figure 2a Figure 2b Figure 2cA flat metal bar (called a tappet) is attached to the end (tail) of each lever. All the tappets are held within a locking 
box, so that each one moves in one 
direction when the corresponding lever is pulled to its reverse position, and in the opposite direction when the lever is 
pushed back to its normal position.
To create a lock, a bevelled notch is cut 
in the side of a tappet, and a locking piece (sometimes called a nib) is cut 
to fit the notch. If a horizontal bar is 
placed in the locking box with one end connected to the locking piece, and the other end is connected to 
another locking piece, the movement of one lever is prevented or permitted according to whether a locking piece is 
held in a notch in the tappet, or is clear of (or free to move out of) the notch. The use of bevelled edges enables a 
tappet, when free to move, to force the 
locking piece out of the notch.
In Figure 2a below, when Lever 1 is 
pulled from normal to reverse, the 
tappet will move in the direction of the 
arrow. The positions of the tappets and locking pieces will then be as shown in Figure 2b, and Lever 4 is locked in the 
normal position. It cannot be moved 
because the second locking piece (connected to the first) has engaged in the notch in the tappet of Lever 4 and 
is not free to move out of it. Thus Lever 
1 locks Lever 4. The converse is also true. If Lever 1 is normal and Lever 4 is reverse, Lever 4 locks Lever 1 normal, 
as shown in Figure 2c (this is called 
reciprocal locking and is an inherent feature of mechanical locking). Much more complicated locking arrangements can be created than the simple one 
shown, with levers being locked in both 
normal and reverse positions by multiple other levers, and with locking of one lever by another being conditional on 
the position of a third lever.How does mechanical interlocking work?
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
19
Electrical interlocking 
The advantages of using electrical locking 
became even more evident when colour light signals and electric point machines began to be 
introduced. Mechanical locking could be entirely 
replaced by electric locking, and large levers were no longer necessary for operating points and signals, since no great physical effort was required 
by the signaller to switch an electric signal 
or point machine.
Early all-electric signal boxes used miniature 
mechanical levers on a desk, replicating in 
a more modern form the row of levers in 
mechanical boxes. This evolution led in time to the introduction of control panels, with switches and buttons on the panel being used to set 
whole routes from one signal to the next, without 
the signaller needing to set the points in the route individually.
The ‘route setting’ approach eventually became 
the preferred form of control. The role of the 
interlocking was crucial in this. Instead of being a passive system for determining whether it was safe to operate a set of points or a signal (as 
mechanical locking had been), it became an active 
system that interpreted and acted on requests received from the control panel. In simple form, the request to set a route from one signal to the next is set up by the signaller using switches and 
buttons on the control panel (which has a diagram 
of the track layout on it). The interlocking then moves the relevant points provided it is safe to do so, checks that the track is clear of other trains, 
and clears the entrance signal for the route.
Relays
The fundamental building block of the traditional 
route-setting interlocking is the relay. Before the relay interlocking gained prominence, relays had 
already been used for track circuits and for other 
simple circuits in mechanical and early electric signal boxes. These relays had generally been relatively large devices, often designed to sit on 
shelves. But as relay interlockings became more 
popular, relays were progressively made physically smaller, and were often designed to plug into bases to which all the wiring was connected, so making it easy to replace a faulty one as well as 
enabling hundreds or even thousands of them to 
be housed in a much smaller space. All the wiring and the relays and their bases were mounted on vertical racks, and a large interlocking might have dozens of such racks, all housed in a ‘relay room’.
Not sure what a relay is?
A relay is an electromechanical switch, with an electromagnetic coil, an armature and various contacts. When the coil is energised, the armature 
moves and closes a number of contacts (‘front’ or 
‘normally open’ contacts) and opens others (‘back’ or ‘normally closed’ contacts). These contacts are used in other circuits to create the logic 
conditions for operating other relays, powering 
point machines, illuminating the aspects of signals etc. When the coil is de-energised the armature returns to its original position, opening the front contacts and closing the back contacts.
Relay interlocking architecture and design
The architecture of relay interlockings varies from railway to railway (even within a single country), and from country to country. We are not going 
to explore all the variations here, but it is worth 
understanding a little about the basic design philosophies that characterise almost all relay interlockings. 
In the early days all relay interlockings were ‘free 
wired’. With this approach, each circuit, whatever its purpose or function, was individually designed and wired, usually in accordance with a set of 
templated (standard) circuits. In time an alternative 
approach emerged, whereby manufacturers provided a range of factory-wired, pre-tested sets of relays known as ‘geographical’ units. Each 
type of unit was designed to provide the standard 
interlocking functions required for a specific combination of signals, points and train detection sections. By connecting the appropriate units together (usually with plug-coupled cables) to 
mimic the actual layout of the track and signalling, 
the required route-setting functionality could be 
Figure 3 – The 
introduction of relay-
based signalling allowed 
control centres to move 
to the use of complex 
panels. These UK 
examples are from Carlisle (left) and London Bridge 
(right) power signal boxes, 
commissioned in the 
1970s.
Photos WB&S Archive/Chippenham Museum & 
Heritage Centre.
Figure 4 – Different 
approaches to relay design. Below, the type N relay, bottom the type C.Photos Siemens Mobility and E Dold & Söhne KG.

 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
20
built up relatively easily. There are advantages and 
disadvantages with both approaches, including cost, flexibility, speed of design and testing.
Secondly, the relay interlocking circuits (both 
free-wired and geographical types) vary in form according to the type of relay used. There are, 
broadly speaking, two generic types of relay used 
for all interlockings. One type is inherently ‘fail-safe’, meaning that if the coil is de-energised, the front contacts will always open, and it is virtually impossible for a failure to occur whereby front 
and back contacts are in the ‘closed’ position at 
the same time. The use of non-welding materials for the contacts makes it impossible for a contact to weld in the closed position. This type of relay 
is known generically as type N in UIC standard 
736i. The best-known family of signalling relays in this category is probably the BR930 series, the development of which, incidentally, involved the IRSE. There are at least 200 variations of this same 
basic relay, with different operating characteristics 
(slow to energise, slow to de-energise etc), different numbers and types of contacts, and different operating voltages. 
The other generic type of relay used in some 
interlocking systems is known as type C in UIC standard 736i. It is not guaranteed to behave in the inherently fail-safe manner described above. 
Specifically, it is possible for a contact to weld 
so that it remains closed when it should be open although, as with a type N relay, the mechanical design prevents any front and back contacts being 
closed at the same time, even if welding occurs (a 
feature known as ‘forcibly guided’ contacts). Such relays have the advantage of being considerably less expensive and smaller. But in order for the interlocking as a whole to behave in a fail-safe 
manner, the circuits are more complicated as 
a consequence of using additional contacts to prove that relays have de-energised correctly, and because of the need to check that the 
circuits are operating in the correct sequence with the passage of the trains. By contrast, the 
dependable fail-safe nature of the type N relay makes it generally unnecessary to include this 
additional complexity.
In all interlockings the circuits are designed to 
exploit the safety characteristics of the relays. 
Usually this is done by requiring a relay to be 
energised to allow a less restrictive state (e.g. to allow a signal to show a proceed aspect, or to allow a set of points to move). If the relay or the power supply fails, or there is a disconnection in 
the circuit, the relay de-energises, so causing the 
signalling equipment to revert to a safer state.
Computer-based interlockings (CBI)
With the development of electronic logic gates in the form of integrated circuits, and subsequently with the emergence of the microprocessor and 
programmable logic controllers (PLCs), it was a 
natural step to see how this technology could be applied to interlockings. Early experimental installations were implemented in the 1960s 
and 1970s, but it was in the mid-1980s that 
the electronic software-based interlocking first became a reality. One of the best known of these was SSI – the ‘Solid State Interlocking’, developed in the UK.
The use of software-driven electronic logic 
presented a whole new set of challenges for system designers. A route relay interlocking is, 
in effect, a hard-wired parallel processing logic 
machine. If it goes wrong it could initiate unsafe actions, but the potential failure modes and their causes are well-understood and, by good 
design practice and by testing it to make sure 
the locking conforms to the application rules, the probability of an unsafe failure is very low. A computer-based interlocking (CBI), which makes use of microprocessors, is another matter entirely, 
however. Microprocessors comprise hardware and 
embedded software, and these are not designed to meet the high integrity safety requirements 
Figure 5 – Route relay 
interlockings have 
been very successful in a huge range of 
applications world-wide. 
In this example from the 
original Singapore MRT scheme the interlocking is interfaced to coded 
track circuits allowing 
a high performance 
automatic train protection and automatic train operation system to be 
implemented.
Photo WB&S Archive/
Chippenham Museum & Heritage Centre.
“A route relay interlocking is, in effect, a  hard-wired parallel processing logic machine.”
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
21
necessary for an interlocking. Failure modes of 
microprocessor-based systems are much more complex and unpredictable than in relay logic, 
and their causes can be difficult to trace. These 
causes include electrical interference, unstable supply voltages, poor programming (leading to memory stack overflows, race conditions, 
deadlock, etc), derived requirement errors and 
manufacturing defects.
The architecture of the software-based 
interlocking must be designed so that the overall 
level of safety is at least as safe as the best relay 
interlocking, despite the relatively low integrity of the component parts and the complexity of their failure modes. The basic approach is to have two 
separate processing channels in the interlocking, 
each one executing the route requests from the control panel (or desk/VDU) in accordance with the signalling principles and application rules for the particular track and signalling layout. This is 
known as a ‘two out of two’ (2oo2) configuration. 
In the event of a difference in the outputs from the channels (indicating an error has occurred), the system shuts itself down and a safe state is 
enforced. In most systems lineside signals return 
to danger (stop) and points cannot be moved. 
In practice, achieving a safe shutdown is not 
quite as simple as it might at first appear. Firstly, 
the part of the system that compares the outputs 
of the two channels and shuts the interlocking down in the event of a difference must be highly dependable. A simple electronic comparator that is monitoring the two outputs is not sufficient. Secondly, there is the problem of common mode 
failure. Since both channels are executing the 
same task, there could be processor problems or programming errors which would affect both channels in the same way. In such circumstances 
there would be no disagreement between the 
outputs presented to the comparator, and the system would consequently not shut down.
There are various solutions to these problems, of 
course, and different system manufacturers adopt 
different approaches. These may involve:
• using different hardware and/or software for the two channels to reduce the likelihood of common mode failure (often called ‘diversity’).
• more complex cross-checking of internal states, inputs and outputs between the two channels in order to detect faults.
• more than one mechanism by which a shutdown can be enforced (and employing special hardware for the purpose). 
These mechanisms are not without their 
difficulties. For instance, a lack of synchronisation 
(differences in timing) of processing in the two channels can cause the two channel outputs to be different for short periods of time, even though each channel is behaving correctly. These 
short-term differences may be interpreted by any 
cross-checking as an error and cause a shutdown, creating a serious threat to reliability.Processing
channel A
VoteProcessing
channel B
ActionProcessing
channel A
VoteProcessing
channel BProcessing
channel C
VoteProcessing
channel D
Action
Processing
channel A
VoteProcessing
channel B
ActionProcessing
channel CFigure 6 – Achieving safety and availability in 
interlocking systems typically involves the adoption of 
one of the architectures shown here.
Above left, ‘two out of two’ requires both processing 
channels to determine a course of action which will only be carried out if both agree. If either fails then the system shuts down to a safe state.
Above right, duplicating two sets of ‘two out of two’ 
and switching between the two pairs increases system availability.
Right, ‘two out of three’ uses three processing channels. 
At least two channels must agree on an action before it is taken, but failure of a single channel will not lead to a shut down.
“Failure modes of microprocessor-based systems are much more complex and unpredictable than in relay logic.”
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
22
Reliability of CBIs
The reliability of computer-based interlockings 
is almost as important as their intrinsic safety. A fault in a relay interlocking (such as a failure of 
a relay) may cause a small number of routes to 
be inoperable, but it is very unlikely to render the whole interlocking unusable and thus stop all trains. But a computer-based interlocking that 
detects a processing fault may shut itself down 
completely, stopping all trains in the area of control. Most modern CBIs therefore have built-in redundancy to improve reliability. 
One approach is to have three processing 
channels in the interlocking, instead of two. If one channel disagrees with the other two, a majority voting system shuts it down and the 
interlocking continues operating with the two 
remaining channels. This configuration is known as ‘Two out of Three’ (‘2oo3’) and was popular in early CBIs when computers were expensive, because it used less hardware than the alternative 
arrangement described below. There is a marginal 
safety disbenefit in this arrangement, because very rarely it could be that one channel is correct and the other two are in error. In addition, if 
the same software is used in all three channels 
then common mode failure remains a risk and producing three diverse sets of code and/or hardware to avoid such failures would be very expensive and create an even greater risk of 
timing issues. However, the other safeguards built 
into the systems makes these issues extremely unlikely in practice. 
Alternatively, some interlockings have a complete 
duplication of the two channels (i.e., two sets, 
each comprising two channels) – a configuration known as ‘Duplicated Two out of Two’ (2X2oo2). If one set identifies a disagreement between its 
channels, it is shut down and the other set (which 
is in effect a ‘hot standby’) continues to operate the railway. This tends to be a more popular arrangement in modern interlockings, as it is easier to implement than 2oo3 and the cost of the 
additional hardware is not such a big issue as it 
used to be. The set of hardware and software that is acting as the hot standby must have all the same inputs and be kept in complete synchronism with 
the controlling set otherwise the changeover will 
not be seamless and some form of initialisation process will be required.Configuring CBIs
All interlockings must be configured for the particular track and signalling layout required – a task generally performed by a signal 
design engineer. In the case of computer-
based interlockings, he or she has to produce configuration logic (program code and/or data) – a process commonly known as ‘data preparation’.
The concepts of ‘free-wired’ and ‘geographical’ 
relay interlockings have their equivalents in 
computer-based interlockings, each with their advantages and disadvantages. Both make use 
of the duplication and redundancy techniques 
described above to achieve required levels of safety and reliability.
The free-wired equivalent typically uses general 
purpose safety PLCs which are configured for 
each specific railway layout. A notation known as ‘Ladder Logic’ is frequently used to configure the system, although it is also possible to use 
fundamental Boolean logic or more sophisticated 
PLC programming languages. Ladder logic resembles a conventional circuit diagram that has switches, relay coils and contacts, and other electrical elements such as counters, latches and 
timers. It is therefore intuitively easy to produce by 
someone familiar with relay circuits.
The equivalent of a geographical relay 
interlocking uses a more conventional form 
of microprocessor-based computer. The core system (the ‘generic product’) is customised by incorporating standard software modules which 
define how basic track and signalling elements 
operate in accordance with the signalling principles for the railway on which it is to be used. This hardware and software package is the signalling manufacturer’s interlocking country/
client-specific product (known as the ‘generic 
application’). The signal design engineer then produces application data which defines how the country/client-specific software modules 
are configured to represent the particular track 
and signalling layout (known as the ‘specific application’). The data format is usually proprietary to each manufacturer’s system.
In both types of interlocking, the safety of the 
railway is critically dependent not only upon the core interlocking product but also upon the correctness of the specific application data/logic, 
which is why so much effort goes into checking 
and testing it.
Generic product softwareGeneric application softwareSpecific application logic
Operating system, created as part
of product development, common
across all railways where product usedSignalling logic and rules, typically
entered once per railway, common
across all applications on that railwayProject specific signalling logic
configuring system to a specific 
scheme plan and layoutFigure 7 – Most 
computer-based interlockings split their software and configuration into a number of layers, enabling the same basic hardware to be used in many different applications.
“The safety 
of the railway 
is critically 
dependent not 
only upon the core interlocking 
product but 
also upon the 
correctness 
of the specific application data/
logic”
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
23
Nowadays a large proportion of the data and 
logic for computer-based interlockings can be generated automatically from the signalling 
scheme specifications. Signal design engineers 
can therefore concentrate their skills on the special or unusual interlocking elements of a signalling scheme which cannot be designed 
automatically. Simulation and automated testing 
can also reduce the amount of manual verification and validation required. Because interlockings primarily implement a set of logical rules they are particularly well suited to testing and validation 
using formal methods and automation. Most 
of the major interlocking suppliers have now adopted these methods in some form and as a result the number of errors found by more 
conventional testing, particularly in the field, has 
reduced very significantly.
The interfaces between an 
interlocking and other sub-systems
In a modern signalling system, an interlocking 
interfaces with a number of other sub-systems. The three most important interfaces are with 
the trackside equipment, with the control panel 
(or computer workstation), and with other neighbouring interlockings. There are of course other interfaces, but we are not attempting 
here to describe the architecture of a complete 
signalling system, so they are not explored in this article.Interlocking to control panel/desk 
interface
The signaller controls the movement of trains 
either by use of a control panel or by using a control desk and workstation. A panel is equipped 
with a representation of the track layout, on which 
are buttons and switches for setting routes etc, and indications to show him or her information including what routes are set, the positions of 
trains and the aspects of signals. In the case of 
a control desk and workstation, the signaller has the same information presented to him/her on screen and sets routes etc by use of a keyboard and mouse.
The interface with the interlocking is therefore 
two-way, with route requests being sent from the control panel/desk to the interlocking and 
information from the interlocking being sent to 
the control panel/workstation. There is usually some sort of interface sub-system (either relays or software-based) between the two. 
A typical control panel/desk will communicate 
with several interlockings, as the geographical 
area covered by the control panel/desk is often larger than that covered by a single interlocking. Where all the interlockings are housed in 
the same building as the control panel/desk, 
the communication with the interlockings is achieved either by multi-core cables or by a data Control Centre
(Con trol Pa nel or
Computer Workstation)
Interlocking
Requ ests
Indications
Requ estsNeighbouring
interlockingsMulticore cable, 
datalink or 
transm ission 
systemHigh integrity 
multicore cable, 
datalink or 
transm ission 
system
Trackside cabinet
containing interface 
equipmen t/object 
controllers
StatusHigh integrity 
multicore cable, 
datalink or 
transm ission 
systemCommandsHigh integrity 
        cables
Points Signals Train detectionTrackside cabin et 
containing interface 
equipmen t/object 
controllers
High integr ity 
        cables
Points Signals Train detectionTrackside cabin et 
containing interface 
equipmen t/object 
controllersCommandsHigh integrity 
        cables
Points Signals Train detection
Commands
Figure 8 – The 
interlocking forms the ‘safety layer’ of a railway signalling system, receiving information from and relaying status to a control centre, communicating with adjacent interlockings, and controlling trackside objects.
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
24
communications bus. If some of the interlockings 
are in buildings some distance from the control centre, then some form of remote control and 
indication system (using, for instance, time-
division multiplexing) is often used to connect interlockings to the control centre to reduce the amount of cabling required. 
It is important to note that all these 
communication links are not safety-critical (i.e. they do not have to be SIL 4). The interlocking ensures the safety of train movements even if 
there is a fault or failure in the communications 
links or interface sub-systems. That said, the interfaces and communications links must be as reliable as possible, both for normal working and 
in degraded mode situations. In both cases, the 
control panel or workstation is presenting the signaller with information about the railway, upon which he or she makes decisions regarding the movement of trains. 
Many modern signalling systems include 
Automatic Route Setting (ARS), a sub-system which automatically sets routes ahead of each 
train based on the timetable and, where conflicts 
arise (eg because of late running), on a set of rules for prioritisation of train movements. This relieves the signallers of much of their routine work. So far as the interlocking is concerned, however, it 
receives and acts on ARS route-setting requests 
in the same way as if the requests had come from the signaller and the control panel/workstation.
Interlocking to trackside equipment 
interface
In the case of a relay interlocking, in most 
systems the items of trackside equipment (signals, points, track circuits etc) are connected to the 
interlocking by multi-core cables, with a dedicated 
pair of cores for each circuit. The cables are generally specified and constructed to meet railway requirements, both in terms of resilience 
to the trackside environment, and in terms of 
the integrity and separation of each core. This is necessary because they are carrying safety critical circuits for operating the signals, moving points, indicating the occupancy or otherwise of a track 
circuit to the interlocking etc. The interlocking 
depends upon the integrity of these circuits in order to function safely.
In the case of computer-based interlockings, the 
items of trackside equipment are normally (but not 
always) connected to nearby object controllers which provide the power for the equipment, pass the interlocking commands to the equipment and 
receive equipment status information for sending 
back to the interlocking. The object controllers are connected to the trackside equipment by high integrity cables as described above, and to the interlocking via a communications datalink. Just 
as with relay interlockings, the integrity of the 
communication link is vital for the safe operation of the interlocking. The object controllers therefore generally have a 2oo2 configuration 
to ensure safety, and the datalink uses highly 
secure coding techniques to prevent (or detect) corruption of the transmitted data. In some manufacturers’ systems the communications protocol is proprietary to their product, but 
increasing use is now being made of IP addressing 
techniques. Manufacturers still use their own safety and applications protocols, although the European EULYNX project is promoting open 
standards for interfaces, to reduce signalling 
life cycle costs.
Interlocking to interlocking interface
Interlockings must be able to interface with neighbouring interlockings, because almost inevitably at the geographical boundaries there 
will be routes that have their entrance signal in 
the area controlled by one interlocking and their exit signal in the area controlled by another. The route setting process is initiated by the 
interlocking responsible for the entrance signal, 
but requires action by, and information from, the other interlocking in order for the complete route to be declared ‘set’, before the entrance signal is allowed to clear. 
Figure 9 – The use 
of computer-based 
interlocking, and increasingly the use of network communications, allows modern control systems to be implemented, as in this example from Hong Kong MTR. The interlocking continues to ensure that the signalling rules are enforced to assure safety, but the non-vital control system above allows the railway to be operated optimally.Photo Francis How.
“Just as 
with relay 
interlockings, 
the integrity 
of the 
communication 
link is vital for 
safe operation”
 IRSE News |  Issue 265  |  April 2020
25
It is common practice, so far as possible, 
to arrange the geographical boundaries of 
interlockings to occur on sections of plain line, where the interlocking arrangements for each 
cross-boundary route are very straightforward. 
However, this is not always possible, particularly in places such as complex station areas where more than one interlocking is required. In 
the case of relay interlockings, the interface 
generally takes the form of high integrity multi-core cables to link circuits in the two equipment buildings – the same sort of cables as are used to connect the relay interlockings with their items of 
trackside equipment.
In the case of computer-based interlockings, a 
high integrity datalink is used for the interface 
(bearing in mind that the two interlockings may 
well be in physically adjacent cabinets in an equipment room rather than in separate buildings). However, the interfacing arrangements tend 
to be more complex than in the case of relay 
interlockings. The two sets of software have to act together and perform ‘handshakes’ with each other in order to set, lock and release routes. 
The future of interlocking
At the beginning of this article we said that ‘interlocking’ is the mutual dependency between signalling functions (moving points, clearing 
signals etc). We have seen how these interlocked 
functions are made real by use of some sort of ‘logic machine’, whether mechanical, electrical or computerised, which signal engineers call 
an interlocking. In a modern signalling system 
we might expect to see a relay interlocking or a suite of computer interlockings housed in a building or in a cabinet trackside, connected to trackside equipment, the control panel/
desk and screen, and to other interlockings by 
cables and data transmission systems. But the concept of a physically discrete interlocking is starting to change. 
Various examples come to mind. Firstly, in the 
case of ERTMS Levels 2 and 3, there is a second vital element in the system, namely the Radio Block Centre (RBC), which links trains with 
the interlocking, sending information about 
movement authorities, permissible speeds etc and receiving information about the train speed and location. Like the interlocking, the RBC must be 
of the highest safety integrity. System suppliers 
are starting to combine these two functions on the same computer platform, and in the world of metros, a number of systems already combine the functions of interlocking and track-train messaging within the same system.
A second possibility, and one that is already 
being explored, is to use cloud technology for interlocking. This has various advantages, including cost, flexibility and, potentially, resilience. It also comes with challenges, not the 
least of which is maintaining cyber-security (and 
therefore safety as well as reliability).
Thirdly, we may see a move towards distributed 
interlocking functionality. In recent years the trend 
has been to place computer-based interlockings together in a single location (often co-located with the control centre). In time this may change, with some interlocking functions shared between 
the train-borne and trackside systems. Indeed, it 
could be argued that this is already happening to a limited extent with CBTC and ERTMS. 
Even more radically, the train may play a key role 
in initiating the setting of the route ahead and in determining its own safe movement authority, making use of train-to-train communications to do so. A more train-centric architecture will 
be adopted, with the trains being ‘smart’ rather 
than simply responding to movement authorities issued by trackside infrastructure systems. Again, suppliers are already starting to make some of 
this a reality. This may well lead in time to some 
of the traditional principles of signalling being challenged, such as making the distance between following trains dependent upon their relative speeds rather than always assuming the train 
ahead is stationary.
Closing remarks
This article has provided an introduction to 
the technologies used for railway interlocking. Next month we will look at the functionality of 
an interlocking. 
If you want to know more, some of the IRSE 
textbooks cover the subject in greater detail. For 
many signal engineers the specification and design 
of interlockings is at the heart of their careers. It requires knowledge, experience and expertise – and it is vital to the safety of the railway. But if you are new to the industry, don’t let that deter you. 
Instead, take every opportunity to learn from those 
who have the experience and knowledge.
About the author ...
Francis has been a long-time member of the IRSE. First with British Rail/Railtrack, Atkins, as the technical director of the Railway Industry 
Association and chief executive of the IRSE. 
He was an IRSE exam Thorrowgood scholar and served on Council for many years and was president of the Institution 2012-2013. He is 
widely respected for his professionalism and technical knowledge and played a vital role in drawing younger members into the running 
of the Institution and has encouraged and helped them develop their capabilities in both their professional and IRSE roles. He has given 
quiet encouragement and encouraged self-
confidence in many of the rising engineers in the control and communications industry.“The concept 
of a physically discrete interlocking is starting to change”
20
Francis HowBack to basics: Interlocking 
Part 2
Last month in IRSE News there was the 
third in a series of articles on ‘back to 
basics’ themes, looking at the essentials of ‘interlocking’, focused on the technology used. This month we are going to look at the functions that an interlocking performs, and how these ensure the safe movement of trains.
This article is no more than an introduction 
to the subject, intended for IRSE members new to the industry rather than those who are 
experienced in specifying, designing and testing 
signalling systems. 
The functions of a modern 
interlocking
We saw in last month’s article that interlockings 
have used a variety of mechanical, electrical, electronic and software-based technologies over 
the years. But regardless of what technology is 
used, a route-setting interlocking must perform essentially the same functions in order to ensure the safe movement of trains. These functions, 
which are defined in the railways’ signalling 
principles and application rules, must be compatible with the operational rules/regulations for the movement of trains, under both normal and failure conditions. 
The signalling principles and application rules for 
the interlocking functions vary somewhat from country to country but are similar in their basic 
requirements. The descriptions of the principal 
functions in this article are based on the current signalling principles used for colour light lineside signalling of passenger railways on the mainline railway in Great Britain and in some other 
countries (they are relaxed somewhat for shunting, 
permissive and freight movements, but these are not covered in this article). Where some railways adopt significantly different practices, these are 
noted but are not described in any detail. Checking route availability
When a request to set a route is sent from the 
control panel/desk/VDU (or from the Automatic Route Setting system, where one is provided), 
the interlocking first checks that the route can be 
set in its entirety, and that the request does not conflict with any other routes that have already been set or are in the process of being set. 
Without this check, the interlocking might start 
moving points to set the route but fail to complete the process because one or more points are locked in the wrong position by routes that are set for other train movements. The check is also vitally 
important for ‘directly opposing’ routes, for trains 
travelling in the opposite direction to the route whose availability is being checked, and for which the point settings are identical. 
If the whole of the route is not available for 
setting at the time the request is received by the interlocking, it is rejected or ignored, rather than being stored until the route can be set. This is 
a feature known as ‘anti-preselection’. Not all 
railways include it, but it is often regarded as good practice to prevent a route request from continuously trying to make the interlocking set a 
route that cannot (yet) be set.
Route setting and locking
When the route availability check is successfully 
completed, the interlocking starts moving the points in the route to their required positions. It 
may also be necessary to move other points that 
are not in the route itself, to protect the route from other trains in the event that they pass a signal that is displaying a stop aspect.
When the points are correctly positioned, route 
locking is applied to all the track detection sections that form the route, thereby reserving each section for the route being set, preventing 
the points from being moved and ensuring that no 
conflicting routes can be set. “Signalling 
principles vary from country to country but are similar in their basic requirements”
 IRSE News |  Issue 266  |  May 2020
21
Overlaps
Many countries and railway administrations also 
lock and protect a short section of track beyond the exit signal as part of the route-setting process. 
This is called the ‘overlap’, and it is typically 
between 50m and 200m in length. The provision of overlaps is not a universal practice, however. Some railways do not use overlaps at all and, at 
the other extreme, some have overlaps which 
comprise, in effect, all the track from the exit signal to the next signal beyond that. Even on railways that use overlaps, they are not necessarily required for all types of routes. Where railways do 
use overlaps the rules for setting and locking them 
vary from one railway administration to another, so it is worth emphasising that this description applies to main line railways in Great Britain and is 
not necessarily true of other railways.
The purpose of an overlap is that if the exit signal 
is at danger (stop) and the train fails to come to a stand at the signal because of inadequate 
deceleration, it is likely to stop within the overlap 
distance and so avoid risk of collision with other legitimate train movements. Of course, it is not guaranteed that the train will stop within 
the overlap, and an overlap is of no help at all 
if the train brakes have not been applied or the adhesion conditions are very poor. It should also be noted that with cab signalling, overlaps have an additional purpose, to do with the accuracy with 
which the train location is known.
Trailing points in an overlap are set to the correct 
position and locked when a route is set. Where there are facing points ahead of the exit signal 
there may be more than one overlap that can 
be used. These facing points must be set to the position required for the selected overlap, and they may also be locked. The reason for not 
locking the facing points in all circumstances 
is that in complex areas such as stations, the interlocking may permit the overlap to be changed after the entrance signal has been cleared (a feature known as ‘swinging overlaps’) by moving the position of the facing points to create a new overlap. This provides signallers with greater operational flexibility. The facility to swing an 
overlap is inhibited by the interlocking as the 
train approaches the exit signal so that a safe (locked) overlap exists in case the train passes the signal at danger. Designing the circuits or data 
for swinging overlaps can become very complex 
indeed, however, and their provision should be limited to that which is considered necessary for operational purposes. 
The setting of an overlap happens only if the exit 
signal is at danger (stop), of course. If a further onward route is set for the train, from the exit signal to the next signal beyond, then that route 
is itself set and locked in the same manner as 
described above.
Clearing the entrance signal
When the route has been set (as described above), all relevant train detection sections must be proved ‘clear’ (i.e. no train or vehicles 
present) before the entrance signal is permitted 
by the interlocking to show a proceed aspect. This includes:
• All the track that forms the route between the entrance and exit signals.
• All the track that forms the overlap ahead of the exit signal (if an overlap is provided).
• Any other sections of track on which a train or individual rail vehicle could stand and be ‘foul’ of the route (i.e. with which the authorised 
train could collide).
• Any ‘flank’ sections of track, which are 
included to provide early detection of another train passing its own exit signal at danger 
(SPAD) and thereby intruding onto the route of 
the authorised train.
In the case of lineside signalling, other checks may also be required before the signal is permitted Interlocking has been an 
underpinning concept for railway safety since the 1850s, although the technology upon it depends has changed phenomenally during  that period. Areas of points and crossings are the most complex part of any interlocking design.Photo Paul Darlington.
“Some railways 
don’t use overlaps at all”
 IRSE News |  Issue 266  |  May 2020
22
to clear, including the following. Not all railways 
apply these checks, and the specific rules for applying them vary from one railway to another:
• The exit signal must be alight (i.e. displaying 
a visible aspect), to avoid the risk of the driver 
failing to see it.
• If the entrance signal is required to display 
a route indication for the route set, that indication must be proved alight before the entrance signal is permitted to display a proceed aspect.
• If the train is being routed over a diverging junction ahead of the entrance signal, that signal may be held at a restrictive aspect (stop or caution) by the interlocking until the train has slowed down sufficiently for the diverging points and the route beyond. 
There may be other requirements that have to be satisfied before the interlocking will permit the entrance signal to clear, for instance for level crossings or train protection systems (the latter to stop, or mitigate the risk of, the train passing its exit signal at danger). 
The actual aspect displayed by the entrance 
signal when it clears, including any speed or route indications, depends not only upon the route immediately ahead, but also on whether a further route has been set for the train beyond the exit signal. The sequence of aspects seen by a driver at successive signals as he or she approaches a signal at danger (stop) varies from one railway to another and is not dealt with in this article.
On most railways that use colour light signalling, 
the entrance signal will revert to danger (stop) if the conditions that permitted it to clear are no longer fulfilled. So, for instance, if a track 
circuit in the route fails, or there is a loss of 
detection on a set of points, the entrance signal will automatically revert to danger. This is a safe arrangement but can be worrying for a driver who unexpectedly encounters a signal at danger (stop). Some railways do not include reversion – and of course, with mechanical signals there was no possibility of doing so! Route holding and release
When the train passes the entrance signal 
(showing a proceed aspect), the interlocking 
returns the entrance signal to danger (stop) but maintains the locking ahead of the train to prevent 
points from being moved and conflicting routes 
from being set. In order to maximise capacity and 
flexibility it is, however, desirable for the locking 
to be removed as soon as it is safe to do so after the passage of the train, in order that other routes may be set which make use of the same track (or some of it). 
Before the locking can be released after the 
passage of the train, the route request must first 
be cancelled. Traditionally this would be done by the signaller using the control panel/desk. 
However, to ease the signaller’s workload and to enable the locking to be released as soon as possible, many modern interlockings include a function called ‘train operated route release’ 
(TORR), which cancels the route request from the control panel/desk when the train has passed 
the entrance signal, without any action by the signaller. The interlocking normally does this by checking that the first two or three train detection sections beyond the signal show ‘occupied’ and 
then ‘clear’ in the correct sequence with the 
passage of the train (this minimises the risk of a train detection failure leading to the premature 
release of the route). Although the route request 
is cancelled by this process, the route locking is 
maintained to ensure the safe passage of the train.
The interlocking may also have a function which 
permits individual portions of the route to be unlocked as soon as possible after the train has passed, rather than having to wait until the train has passed through the whole route. This is 
known as ‘sectional route release’. As the train passes clear of each train detection section 
in the route, the locking on that section is 
released, provided that:
• The entrance signal has returned to 
‘stop’ (danger).
Interlocking design is 
based on the avoidance 
of conflicting routes, 
allowing for a wide range of combinations of possible events.Photo Paul Darlington.
“There may 
be other 
requirements 
that have to be 
satisfied before the interlocking 
will permit the 
entrance signal 
to clear”
 IRSE News |  Issue 266  |  May 2020
23
• The route request has been cancelled (either 
by the signaller or by TORR).
• All the route locking from the entrance signal up to the start of the section has 
already been released.
Route locking ahead of the train continues to 
be maintained. 
Approach Locking
There is a further category of route release, 
applicable only where the route has to be 
cancelled before the train passes the entrance 
signal. Clearly this is an unusual set of 
circumstances – for instance if the signaller needs to change the order of two trains at a junction 
after the route has been set for one of them, or if 
there is an emergency and it is necessary to try to 
stop the train. In such circumstances the signaller 
cancels the route on the control panel/desk, which has the effect of setting the entrance signal 
to stop (danger). This action does not necessarily 
immediately release the route locking ahead of 
the entrance signal, however, in case the train 
cannot brake sufficiently to stop at the signal and 
consequently enters the route beyond it.
The interlocking function that determines when 
the route locking ahead of the entrance signal is 
released in the circumstances described above 
is known as ‘approach locking’. In its more 
comprehensive form, it maintains the locking of 
the route ahead of the entrance signal (which is displaying stop/danger) until one of the following 
conditions is satisfied:
• The train has come to a stand at or 
before the signal, or
• The train has sufficient braking distance to come to a stand at or before the signal.
With lineside signalling the first of these conditions 
is usually achieved by using a timer in the 
interlocking, rather than directly confirming the 
train is at a standstill. When it has finished timing, the train is assumed to either have come to a 
stand at the signal or to have passed it, being unable to stop in time (in the latter case the 
route locking holds the route safe for the train). 
The second condition consists of a check by the interlocking that the train has not yet occupied any of the train detection sections between the sighting point of the first signal displaying a 
caution aspect and the entrance signal displaying stop. With cab signalling, the speed and location 
of the train are usually known and can be used 
to check the two conditions, which is a more 
accurate method of checking whether the 
conditions are fulfilled.
Releasing the overlap
If the exit signal is at danger (stop), and the train has safely stopped at it, then it is necessary to release the locking of any points in the overlap 
beyond the signal. The reason for this is that 
the points may either not be set correctly for the train’s onward route, or because another train needs to use some of the track and points 
in the overlap.
With lineside signalling, the interlocking times 
the train’s occupancy of the last train detection 
section on the approach to the signal. When the timer finishes, and provided that the train detection section immediately beyond the 
signal has not been occupied, the interlocking 
will release the points in the overlap. With cab signalling, the speed and location of the train are usually known and can be used directly to check 
the train is at a standstill at the signal. 
When the interlocking determines that the train 
is stationary at the exit signal, the locking of the 
overlap is released and the track and points in it can be used for setting the onward route, or for routing other trains. 
Other interlocking functions
This article describes only the basic interlocking functionality of a signalling system. There are, of course, many other functions that may feature, including:
• The role of the interlocking in displaying speed information via lineside signals. This is of particular importance on ‘speed signalled’ railways, as distinct from ‘route signalled’ railways.
• Interlocking the signalling system with protection systems for personnel 
working on the track.
Interlocking design has 
to consider many factors 
including the speed of the trains using the railway and interfaces to other equipment such as level crossings.Photo Shutterstock/VanderWolf images.“There are many other 
functions that 
may feature in an 
interlocking”
 IRSE News |  Issue 266  |  May 2020
24
 
Route Information  Points Free to Go or 
Release  Route 
Normal  Opposing Route Locking  
Locked after route set until  Points Called, Locked and 
Detected  Tracks  Aspect Sequence  Approach  
Locked when  Approach Locking 
Released  Special Controls  
Entrance 
signal / 
Route  Exit 
signal  Class  Normal  Reverse  Tracks Clear  Tracks Occ upied 
for time (sec)  Normal  Normal 
or 
Reverse  Reverse  Proved Clear  Proved 
occupied  for 
time Aspect  Indication  Signal  
Ahead 
Aspect  Signal  
Cleared/  
Route set  Unless  
tracks 
clear  First Condition
 Second Condition
 or Time  
(secs)  
B12A  B11 M ain B7, B6  - B3 EE - B7,  
B6 #10 - - EE#11, ED, 
EC  EG #12  
Y - B11 
Red#13 B12 - EF occ,  
EE occ  EF clr,  
EE occ  180  #15, #16, #17  
B2 EE  
[EB, EC, ED  
 …...or
…..  
 
ED for 40]  G 
#14 - Green 
 
Assumes  
• M odern Network Rail practice, including:  
 TPWS train protection designed to stop train within overlap length  
 Route locking incorporates track bob protection  
• Sufficient standage in the loops that the longest trains may pass; 
therefore special controls  are not necessary.  
• No special controls relating to the method of single line working are necessary (method  is unspecified on the plan but would appear not to be 
Track Circuit Block, Token Block nor One Train Working- No Staff) .  
Special Notes  
 
#10 Point set and locked, but not detected  
#11 Stick track  - returns  signal to red (danger) when occupied when signal off and berth track also occupied 
#12 Only applies when Temporary Approach Control Facility selected by technician 
#13 Includes proving that associated TPWS loops energi sed 
#14 AWS electro live when signal at green and alight , AWS suppressor energised after route set from B3 or B4 provided that no 
Up direction movement from Ramsey is possible.  
#15 TPWS energised whilst signal controlled to Red 
#16 Route cancelled by triggering of  Pre-Defined Overrun Protection Group by a SPAD detected at B2  
#17 Route cancelled by activation of Signal Group Replacement Control  
 
 F,56(7RIURP
5DPVH\%XQJDORZ
/RRS
1RWWR6FDOH
F,56(7RIURP5DPVH\%XQJDORZ
/RRS
1RWWR6FDOH
Figure 1 – Simple Scheme Plan, showing the signals, 
train detection sections, points, overlap etc. This 
example was used in a recent IRSE examination.Figure 2 – Example of a signal/route control table for the route from signal B12 to B11 (as shown in Figure 1). Our thanks to Peter Woodbridge for creating this example.
 IRSE News |  Issue 266  |  May 2020
25
• The provision of train protection systems (which will be 
covered in another ‘Back to Basics’ article, soon to be published in IRSE News).
• Interlocking with level crossings or other moveable infrastructure (e.g. swing bridges).
Specifying interlocking requirements
The process for specifying the interlocking requirements for a particular track layout is strictly governed by railway administrations (or in some cases their regulatory bodies), 
because of the safety implications of an error.
Ideally, the starting point for the signal engineer is to be 
provided with details of the proposed track layout and the 
operational requirements. The first of these includes knowledge 
of the location of points and associated critical dimensions. The operational requirements include the frequency of trains, their maximum speeds and braking capabilities, the required 
headways and the specific train movements (main line, 
shunting, permissive etc). 
In practice, this ideal starting point is not always the reality! 
Signal engineers may, for instance be told to replicate the 
existing signalling arrangements in modern form (which is itself 
an ambiguous statement), without being given any explicit 
statement of operational requirements.
The signal engineer also needs to know the signalling principles 
applicable to the railway for which the design is being prepared. These are the high-level generic rules for ensuring the safe movement of trains, and they cover all the requirements relating to route setting, locking and release – and more. 
The knowledge of the track layout, the operational 
requirements and the signalling principles enables the signal engineer to produce two key sets of documents. The first is the Scheme Plan, and the second are the Control Tables.
Scheme Plan
The Scheme Plan depicts the layout of the track, showing points, signals, train detection sections, level crossings, stations, permissible speeds etc. Each track is usually shown as a single 
line, not a pair of lines. Each signalling object is allocated a 
unique identity (numbers and/or letters). The plan also shows the routes that each train can take from each signal. Each route is given a unique identity. Other relevant information may also 
be shown on, or be associated with, the Scheme Plan. A simple 
Scheme Plan is shown in Figure 1, for a single line with a passing loop at a station. The symbols shown are used by many railways 
around the world, but are not universal. Control Tables
The Control Tables state all the conditions that must be 
fulfilled for each route before a train can be given a movement authority to use it. The route information is derived from 
the Scheme Plan– the position of points, the train detection 
sections that must be clear, other routes that must not be set etc. Approach locking release conditions are also specified, as are requirements for functions such as the delayed clearance 
of signals at diverging junctions, and the aspect sequence 
for successive signals. A simple example of a signal/route control table is shown in Figure 2, for a route from signal B12 to B11 on the Plan in Figure 1. The requirements are based on current British (Network Rail) signalling practice and include 
some features (such as train protection proving and technician 
controls) that we have not dealt with in this article.
Control Tables are also prepared for each set of points, stating 
the conditions that must be fulfilled before a set of points is free 
to move. This includes the routes that require the points to be 
normal or reverse, dead-locking train detection sections and point-to-point locking.
It is in the preparation of the Control Tables that the signal 
engineer’s knowledge of the signalling principles and application rules is of vital importance. From the Control Tables, the circuit diagrams for relay interlockings (based on standard circuits) can be produced, or the data in the case of a 
computer-based interlocking. 
The production of the Control Tables is, therefore, a critical 
step in the design and configuration of the interlocking. 
Nevertheless, the gradual automation of the design process 
means that it is possible to go directly from Scheme Plan to detailed design, with the Control Tables being a by-product of the process for later use (e.g. for recording tests performed on the interlocking), rather than being a key stage in the 
design process. 
Closing remarks
This article and last month’s have provided an introduction to 
railway interlocking – and if you want to know more, some of the IRSE textbooks cover the subject in greater detail. For many 
signal engineers the specification and design of interlockings is 
at the heart of their careers. It requires knowledge, experience and expertise – and it is vital to the safety of the railway. But if you are new to the industry, don’t let that deter you. Instead, 
take every opportunity to learn from those who have the 
experience and knowledge.
However functional 
and complex the 
interlocking is, it’s important to ensure 
that the information 
relayed to the driver 
is clear and easily understood, as an aspect indicating safe 
speed (left) or route 
based signalling.
Photos Shutterstock/Miles Schofield and Paul Darlington.