IEEE SA
STANDARDS
ASSOCIATION
IEEE Standard for Communications-
Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance
and Functional Requirements
IEEE Vehicular Technology Society
|
Developed by the
Rail Transportation Standards Committee
IEEE Std 1474.Ir-2025
Revision OfIEEE Std 1474.1-2004)
IEE

IEEE Std 1474.1 TM -2025
(Revision of IEEE Std 1474.1-2004)
IEE Standard for Communications
Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance
and Functional Requirements
Developed by the
Rail Transportation Standards Committee
Ofthe
IEEE Vehicular Technology Society
Approved 27 March 2025
IEEE SA Standards Board

Abstract: Performance and functional requirements for a
communications-based train control
(CBTC) system are established in this standard.A CBTC system is a continuous, automatic train
control system utilizing high-resolution train location determination, independent of track circuits;
continuous, high-capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside data communications; and train-borne and
wayside processors capable of implementing automatic train protection (ATP) functions, as well
35
optional automatic train operation (ATO) and automatic train supervision (ATS) functions。 In
addition to CBTC functional requirements; this standard also defines headway criteria, system
safety criteria, and system availability criteria for a CBTC system. This standard is applicable to the
full range of transit applications including automated people movers:
This standard establishes a
setof performance and functional requirements necessary for enhancing performance, availability;
operations, and train protection using a CBTC System.
Keywords: automation, CBTC, communications, IEEE 1474.1, signaling, train control
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.
3 Park Avenue; New York; NY 10016-5997, USA
Copyright @ 2025 by
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; Inc.
AIl rights reserved.
Published 13 June 2025. Printed in the United States of America。
IEEE is a registered trademark in the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office, owned by The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers;
Incorporated.
PDF:
ISBN 979-8-8557-1565-1
ST027822
Print:
ISBN 979-8-8557-1566-8
STDP027822
IEEE prohibits discrimination, harassment; and bullying。
For more information, visit https:/www.ieee.orglaboutlcorporatelgovernance/pg-26.html。
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form, in an electronic retrieval system or otherwise, without the prior written permission
of the publisher。
The

Important Notices and Disclaimers Concerning IEEE Standards Documents
IEE Standards documents are made available for use subjectto importantnotices and legal disclaimers. These
notices and disclaimers, or a reference to this page (https: /Istandards.ieee.orgliprldisclaimers .html), appear i
allIEEE standards and may be found under the heading 'Important Notices and Disclaimers Concerning IEEE
Standards Documents _
Notice and Disclaimer of Liability Concerning the Use of IEEE Standards
Documents
IEE Standards documents
aTC
developed within IEEE Societies and subcommittees of IEEE Standards
Association (IEE SA) Board of Goverors. IEEE develops its standards through an accredited consensus
development Process,
Which
brings together volunteers representing varied viewpoints
and
mnterests
to
achieve the final product. IEEE standards are documents developed by volunteers with scientific, academic,
and
industry-based expertise in technical working groups。
Volunteers involved in technical working groups
are not necessarily members Of IEE or IEEE SA and participate without compensation from IEEE. While
IEEE administers the process and establishes rules to promote fairness in the consensus development process,
IEEE does not independently evaluate, test, or verify the accuracy Ofany Ofthe information Or the soundness
ofany judgments contained in its standards。
IEEE makes no warranties or representations concerning its standards, and expressly disclaims all warranties;
express Or implied,
concerning all standards; including but not limited to the warranties Of merchantability;
ftness for
particular purpose and
non-infringement IEEE Standards documents do not guarantee safety。
security, health, Or environmental protection; Or
compliance with law, Or guarantee
interference with
Or fromn other devices or networks. In addition, IEEE does not warrant or represent that the use ofthe material
contained i its standards is free from patent
infringement. IEE Standards documents are supplied
AS IS'
and CWITHALL FAULTS.
Use Of an IEEE standard is wholly voluntary. The existence Of an IEEE standard does not imply that there
are Io other ways to produce, test, measure, purchase, market, Or provide other
and services related to
the scope ofthe IEE standard. Furthermore, the viewpoint expressed at the time a standard is approved and
issued is subject to change brought about through developments in the state ofthe art and comments received
fromn users of the standard.
I
publishing and making is standards available, IEEE is not suggesting Or rendering professional or other
services for; Or on behalfof, any Person Or entity, nor is IEEE
undertaking to perform any duty owed by any
other person Or
entity to another:
person utilizing any IEEE Standards document should rely upon their
OWI
independent judgment in the exercise Of reasonable care i any given circumstances 0r, as appropriate,
seek the advice ofa competent professional in determining the appropriateness Ofa given IEEE standard.
IN NO EVENT SHALL IEE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECI, INDIRECI, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
BUI
NOT LIMITED
T0:
TE
NEED TO PROCURE SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA,
OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY,
WHETHER
I
CONTRACI,
STRICT
LIABILITY,
OR
TORT (WNCLUDING
NEGLIGENCE
OR
OTHERWISE) ARISING
I
ANY
WAY OUI OF
THE PUBLICATION,
USE OE, OR RELIANCE
UPON
ANY STANDARD, EVEN
正
ADVISED OF
TE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE AND
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER SUCHDAMAGE WAS FORESEEABLE.
Copyright@ 2025 IEEE.AIl rights reserved.
against
goods
Any

Translations
The IEE consensus
balloting process ivolves the review Of documents in English only. In the event that
an IEEE standard is translated, only the English language version published by IEEE is the approved IEEE
standard。
Use by artificial intelligence systems
I no event shall material in any IEEE Standards documents be used for the purpose Of creating; training,
enhancing, developing, maintaining, or contributing to any artificialintelligence systems without the express,
written consent of IEE SA i advance
Artificial intelligence '' refers to any software, application, or other
system that uses artificial
intelligence, machine learning; or similar technologies, to analyze, train, process, Or
generate content. Requests for consent can be submitted using the Contact Us form。
Official statements
Astatement, written or oral, thatis not processed in accordance with the IEEE SA Standards Board Operations
Manual is not, and shall not be considered
Or inferred to
the official position of IEEE Or any Of its
committees and shall not be considered to be, or be relied upon a5, a formal position Of IEEE or IEEE SA. At
lectures, symposia, seminars, Or educational courses, an individual presenting information on IEEE standards
shall make it clear that the presenter s views should be considered the personal views ofthat individual rather
than the formal position Of IEEE, IEE SA, the Standards Committee, or the Working Group. Statements
made by volunteers may not represent the formal position of their employer(s)
Or affiliation(s). News releases
about IEEE standards issued by entities other than IEEE SAshould be considered the view ofthe entity issuing
the release rather tan the formal
position OfIEEE or IEEE SA.
Comments on standards
Comments for revision Of IEEE Standards documents are welcome from any interested party, regardless Of
membership affiliation with IEEEor IEEE SA. However; 1EE does notprovide interpretations, consulting
information, or advice pertaining t0 IEEE Standards documents_
Suggestions for changes i documents should be in the form Of a proposed change of text, together with
appropriate supporting comments. Since IEEE standards represent a consensus Of concerned interests, it is
important that any responses to comments and questions also receive the concurrence Ofa balance ofinterests_
For this reason; IEE and the members ofits Societies and subcommittees ofthe IEE SA Board of Governors
arC not able to
provide an instant response to comments Or questions, except in those cases Where the matter
has previously been addressed. For the same reason IEEE does not respond to interpretation requests。
person who would like to participate in evaluating comments or revisions to an IEEE standard is welcome to
join the relevant IEEE SA working group. You can indicate interest in a working group using the Interests tab
i the Manage Profile and Interests area of the IEEE SA myProject system.
An IEE Account is needed to
access the application.
Comments on standards should be submitted using the Contact Us form_
Lawsand
regulations
Users Of IEEE Standards documents should consult all applicable laws and regulations. Compliance with
the provisions ofany IEEE Standards document does not constitute compliance to any
applicable regulatory
Available at: https: / Idevelopment.standards.ieee.org/myproject-weblpublic/view.html#flanding-
Available at:
https:/lstandards.ieee.org/aboutlcontactl .
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
be,
Any

requirements
Implementers of the standard are responsible for observing Or referring to the
applicable
regulatory requirements. IEEE does not, by the publication of its standards, intend to urge action that is not i
compliance with applicable laws, and these documents may not be construed as doing $0.
Data privacy
Users Of IEEE Standards documents should evaluate the standards for considerations Of data privacy and
data ownership in the context Of assessing and using the standards in compliance with applicable laws and
regulations。
Copyrights
IEE draft and approved standards are copyrighted by IEEE under US and international copyright laws.
are made available by IEEE and are adopted for a wide variety Of both
public and private uses. These include
both use by reference; i laws and regulations, and use i private self-regulation, standardization, and the
promotion of engineering practices and methods. By making these documents available for use and adoption
by public authorities and private users, neither IEEE nor its licensors waive any rights in copyright to the
documents_
Photocopies
Subject to payment of the appropriate licensing fees, IEEE willgrant users a limited, non-exclusive license to
photocopy portions Of any individual standard for company or organizational internal use or individual, non-
commercial use only. To alrange for payment Of licensing fees, please contact Copyright Clearance Center;
Customer Service, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923 USA; +1978 750 8400; https: /Lwww.copyright
com/. Permission to photocopy portions of any individual standard for educational classroom use can also be
obtained through the Copyright Clearance Center:
Updating of IEEE Standards documents
Users Of IEEE Standards documents should be aware that these documents may be superseded at any time
by the issuance ofnew editions or may be amended from time to time through the issuance of amendments,
corrigenda, Or errata. An official IEEE document at any point in time consists Of the current edition Of the
documenttogether with any amendments, corrigenda, or errata then in effect。
Every IEEE standard is subjected to review at least every 10 years. When a documentis more than 10 years old
and has not undergone a revision process, it is reasonable to conclude that its contents, although stillof some
value, do not wholly reflect the present state ofthe art. Users are cautioned to check to determine that they have
the latest edition ofany IEEE standard。
I order to determine whether a given documentis the current edition and whetherit has been amended through
the issuance Ofamendments, corrigenda, Orerrata, visit IEEE Xplore or contact IEEE。
more information
about the IEEE SAor IEE s standards development process, visit the IEEE SA Website.
Errata
Errata, jany; forall IEEE standards can be accessed on the IEEE SA Website. 4 Search for standard numberand
year ofapproval to access the web page of the published standard. Errata links are located under the Additional
Resources Details section_
Errata are also available i IEEE Xplore。
Users are
encouraged to periodically
Check for errata
Available at: https: /lieeexplore.ieee.org/browselstandardslcollectionlieee _
Available at: https: /standards.ieee.org/standardlindex.html.
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
They
For

Patents
IEE standards are developed in compliance with the IEEE SA Patent Policy s
Attention is called to the possibility that implementation of this standard may require use Of subject matter
covered by patent rights. By publication Of this standard, no position is taken by the IEEE with respect to the
existence Or
validity Of any patent rights in connection therewith. If a patent holder or patent applicant has
filed a statement of assurance via an Accepted Letter Of Assurance, then the statement is listed on the IEE
SA Website at https:/standards.ieee.orglaboutlsasblpatcompatents html. Letters of Assurance may indicate
whether the Submitter is willing or unwilling to grant licenses under patent rights without compensation
Or under reasonable rates; with reasonable terms and conditions that are demonstrably
Of any unfair
discrimination to applicants desiring to obtain such licenses.
Essential Patent Claims may exist for which a Letter Of Assurance has not been received. The IEE is not
responsible foridentifying EssentialPatentClaims for whichalicense may berequired, forconductinginquiries
into the legal validity Or scope of Patents Claims, Or determining whether any licensing terms Or conditions
provided in connection with submission Of a Letter Of Assurance, 迕 any, Or i any licensing agreements are
reasonable Or
non-discriminatory。
Users Of this standard are expressly advised that determination Of the
validity Of any patent rights, and the risk of infringement Of such rights, is entirely their own responsibility。
Further information may be obtained from the IEE Standards Association.
IMPORTANT NOTICE
Technologies; application of technologies; and recommended procedures in various industries evolve over
time. The IEEE standards development process allows participants to review developments in industries,
technologies, and practices, and to determine what, 让 any, updates should be made to the IEEE standard。
During this evolution, the technologies and recommendations in IEEE standards may be implemented in ways
not foreseen during the standard's development. IEE standards development activities consider research
and information presented to the standards development group i developing any safety recommendations
Other information about safety practices, changes in technology or technology implementation or impact
by peripheral systems also may be pertinent to safety considerations during implementation of the standard。
Implementers and users OfIEEE Standards documents are responsible for determining and complying with all
appropriate safety, security, environmental, health, data privacy, and interference protection practices and all
applicable laws and regulations。
Available at: https: /Istandards.ieee.orglaboutlsasblpatcoml materials.html。
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
free

Participants
Atthe time this IEEE standard was completed, the Communications-Based Train Control Working Group had
the following membership:
Yousef
Kimiagar; Chair
Dave Keevill, Vice Chair
Rajee Alexander
Neil Glennie
Ajay Nayyar
Kurt Andersen
Ivan Grigorchenkov
Kourosh Noori
Ridhzuan Awang
John Hofbauer
Lisaidyn Perez
Philippe Ayrault
Kenneth
Lou Sanders
Yarah IsmailAli
Srinivas Kumar
Will Serrano
Basyoni
Katreddi
Ali Siadati
Nicholas Columnbare
Benjamin Koers
Narayana Sundaram
Muamer Dedovic
Robert Major
Dan Testa
Kenneth Diemunsch
David Male
Carl Thompson
David Dimmer
Wilson Milian
Michael Thornburg
Stephane Dubois
Venugopal Nair
David Thurston
Alireza Edraki
Mehmet Turan
Antonio
Soylemez
Gaite De Las Heras
Lamont Ward
The
following members Of the individual Standards Association balloting group voted
On this standard_
Balloters
have voted for approval, disapproval, or abstention。
Rajee Alexander
Andrew Jones
Stephan Sand
David Dimmer
Kenneth
Carl Schwellnus
Marc Emlelmaln
Piotr Karocki
Jhony Sembiring
Antonio
Srinivas Kumar
CarlThompson
Gaite De Las Heras
Katreddi
Michael Thornburg
Marco Hernandez
Yousef Kimiagar
David Thurston
Werer Hoelzl
Wilson Milian
John Vergis
Oliver Holland
Kourosh Noori
Weiping Wu
Paul
When the 亚E SA Standards Board approved this standard
On 27
March 2025,i had the following
membership:
Lei Wang, Chair
Jon Walter Rosdahl Vice Chair
David J.Law, Past Chaii
Alpesh Shah, Secretary
EdwardAu
Guido R Hiertz
Daleep C. Mohla
Ted Burse
Ronald W.Hotchkiss
Annette D. Reilly
Xiaofeng (Alfred) Chen
Tyler L. Jaynes
Robby Robson
Doug Edwards
Thomas Koshy
Daniel Sabin
Nehad El-Sherif
Howard Li
E. Keith Waters
J. Travis Griffith
Xiaohui Liu
Sha Wei
Deborah R. Hagar
Kevin WLu
Luyang (Eric) Zhang
Hiroshi Mano
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
Karg
may
Karg
Dev

Introduction
This introduction Is not part of IEE Std 1474.1-2025
IEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control
(CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements _
This introduction provides some background on the rationale used to develop this standard. This information
Is meant to aid j the
understanding, usage, and applicability ofthis standard.
Conventionalsignalingltrain control systems rely almost exclusively on track circuits to detect the presence of
tains. Information on the status ofthe track ahead is provided to train operators either through
wayside signals
Or train-borne cab
signals. Ensuring compliance with the signals is achieved through operating procedures,
wayside automatic train stops, or train-borne supervisory equipment linked to the train s braking system。
These conventional systems are effective in providing train protection; but are
Iot
particularly efficient
边
maximizing the utilization Of the rail transit infrastructure; as
result Of a few fundamental limitations。
specifically, the following:
The location of trains can only be determined to the resolution of the track circuits; i any part Ofa
track circuit is
occupied by
train, the whole track circuit shall be assumed to be occupied by the
train. Track circuits can be made shorter; but each additional track circuit requires additional wayside
hardware, so there is an economical and practical limit to the number Of track circuits that can be
provided。
b)
The information that can be provided to a train is limited to a smallnumber Of
wayside signalaspects
Or a
smallnumber ofspeed codes in a cab signal system。
wayside signal system
with automatic train stops but without continuous cab signaling。
Cnforcement is intermittent。
Communications-basedtrain control (CBTC) systems overcome these fundamentallimitations ofconventional
track circuit-based systems, and therefore; permit more effective utilization Of the transit infrastructure. This
Is
accomplished, for example, by allowing trains to operate safely at much closer headways, by permitting
greater fexibility and greater precision i train control,
and by providing continuous safe train separation
aSSUrance
and overspeed protection:
Additional benefits of CBTC technology include the economical
support of automatic train operations (both on the mainline and in maintenance yards), improved
reliability;
and reductions i maintenance costs through
reduction j wayside equipment and real-time diagnostic
information. The basic characteristics Ofa CBTC system include the following:
Determination oftrain location, to a high degree ofprecision, idependent oftrack circuits。
geographically continuous train-to-wayside and wayside-to-train data communications network
to permit the tansfer Of significantly more control and status information than is possible with
conventional systens。
Wayside and train-borne vital processors to process the train status and control data and provide
continuous automatic train protection (ATP). Automatic train operation (ATO) and automatic train
supervision (ATS) functions can also be provided, as required by the particular application。
There are currently no independent standards
defining the performance and functional requirements to be
satisfied by CBTC systems. This standard enhances performance, availability, operations, and train protection;
and facilitates design, development, deployment and commissioning ofnew CBTC applications。
This standard provides standards for Communications Based Train Control functionality. It provides
consistent approach for design and development of these transit control systems. This revision allows for
driverless train operation;
icluding automatic people movers。
As technology changes and evolves the architecture and functionality, and subsequently the standards, Of
Communications-Based Train Control require modification. This revision provides the vehicle to modify
CBTC standards to comply with changing needs in function and safety。
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
For

Contents
1
Overview
1.1
Scope _
1.2 Purpose
11
1.3 Range OfApplications
11
1.4 ExistingApplications
11
1.5
Word usage
12
2.
Normative references
12
3
Definitions, acronyms, and abbreviations
13
3.1
Definitions
13
3.2 Acronyms and abbreviations
16
4
Generalrequirements
7
4.1
Characteristics Of CBTC systems
17
4.2 Categorizationof CBTC systems
17
4.3
Train Confgurations。
17
4.4
Train operating modes
17
4.5 Enteringlexiting CBTC territory.
20
4.6
Train operating speeds _
20
5
Performance requirements
21
5.1
CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways .
21
5.2
CBTC factors contributing to achievable trip times _
21
5.3
System safety requirements_
22
5.4 System assurance requirements_
25
5.5
Environmental requirements
27
6
Functional requirements_
27
6.1
ATP functions
27
6.2
ATO functions_
35
ATS functions
37
6.4
Interoperability interface requirements
41
Annex A (informative) Bibliography.
42
Annex B (informative) Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system _
43
Annex C (informative) Typical CBTC parameters
44
Annex D
(informative) Typicalsafe braking model
45
Annex E (normative) System Safety and Security Program requirements
48
Annex F (informative) Typical approaches to specifying CBTC system availability _
58
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
6.3

List of Figures
Figure B.1一Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system
43
Figure D.I-Typical safe braking model
47
List of Tables
Table C.I-Iypical CBTC parameters_
44
Table E.I-Risk assessment
56
10
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved

IEEE Standard for Communications
Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance
and Functional Requirements
1.
Overview
This standard establishes performance and functional requirements for a communications-based train control
(CBTC) system。
It is divided into six clauses。 Clause
describes the scope and purpose Of this standard。
Clause
2 lists references that are useful i applying this standard. Clause
3
provides definitions that are
either not found 边 other standards Or have been modified for use with this standard. Clause 4 defines the
generaloperating requirements for CBTC systems, including train operating modes to be supported. Clause 5
defines the performance requirements for CBTC systems, icluding headway criteria, system safety criteria,
and system availability criteria. Clause 6 defines the functional requirements for CBTC systems; including
automatic train protection (ATP) functions, automatic train operation (ATO) functions, and automatic train
supervision (ATS) functions_
1.1 Scope
This  standard
establishes
sct
Of performance
and
functional requirements
necessary
for enhancing
performance, availability, operations, and train protection using a CBTC system
1.2 Purpose
There are currently no independent standards defining the performance and functional requirements to be
satisfied by CBTC systems. This standard enhances performance, availability, operations, andtrain protection
and facilitates new CBTC applications。
1.3 Range of Applications
The CBTC performance and functional requirements defined in this standard are intended to be applicable
to the full range of transit applications,
icluding commuter rail, heavy rail, light rail, and monorail transit
Systems, and shall be
applicable to other transit applications; such as automated people movers (APMs) a
CBTCis used for automated train control (ATC).
1.4 Existing Applications
Existing CBTC installations and projects in progress
to the publication of this standard need not comply
with the new OI revised
requirements Of this standard, IEEE Std 1474.1-20xx, except where specifically
required by the authority having jurisdiction。
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
Prior

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
1.5
Word usage
The word shall indicates mandatory requirements strictly to be followed in order to conform to the standard
and
which no deviation is permitted (shall equals is required to).
The word should indicates that among several possibilities one is recommended
35
particularly suitable;
without mentioning Or excluding others; Or that
certain CouISC Of action is preferred but not necessarily
required (should equals is recommended that).
The word may is used to indicate a course Of action permissible within the limits Of the standard (may
is permitted to) 
The word cal is used for statements of possibility and capability, whether material, Physical, or causal (can
equals is able to)
2.
Normative references
The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document (i.e.,
Iust
be understood and used, so each referenced document is cited in text and its relationship to this document is
explained). For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition ofthe
referenced document (including any amendments or corrigenda) applies。
IEEE Std 1474.2TM-2025 , IEEE Standard for User Interface Requirements i Communications-Based Train
8.9
Control (CBTC) Systems.
IEE Std 1475TM-2012, IEEE Standard for the Functioning Of and Interfaces Among Propulsion; Friction
Brake and Train-bore Master Control on Rail Rapid Transit Vehicles。
IEEE Std 1477TM-1998, IEEE Standard for Passenger Information System for Rail Transit Vehicles.
IEE Std 1478T-2013, IEE Standard for Environmental Conditions for
Transit Rail
Car Electronic
Equipment
IEEE Std 1483TM-2000, IEE Standard for Verification of Vital Functions in Processor-Based Systems Used
i Rail Transit Control.
IEE Std 1570TM-2002, IEEE Standard for the Interface Between the Rail Subsystem and the Highway Sub-
system at a Highway Rail Intersection。
The use of the word must is deprecated and cannot be used when stating mandatory requirements; nust is used only to describe
unavoidable situations _
The use Of willis deprecated and cannot be used when stating mandatory requirements; willis only used in statements Of fact。
The IEEE standards or products referred to in this clause are trademarks of The Institute of Electricaland Electronics Engineers, Inc.
IEE publications are available frol The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., http: /Istandards.ieee.orgl _
12
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
from
equals
they

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
3
Definitions, acronyms, and abbreviations
3.1
Deflinitions
For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply. The IEEE Standards Dictionary
Online should be consulted for terms not defined j this clause. 10
authority having jurisdiction (AHJ): An entity that has the power to make decisions relating to the direct or
delegated responsibilities assumed in conjunction with the application of a standard or recommended practice.
automated people
Iovers
(APMs): A guided transit mode with fully automated operations, featuring
vehicles that operate On
guideways with exclusive right-of-way。
automatic train
control (ATC): The system for automatically controlling train
Iovemcnt
enforcing
train safety, and directing train operations. ATC includes automatic train protection (ATP) and may include
automatic train operation (ATO) and/or automatic train supervision (ATS)。
automatic train operation (AT0): The subsystem within the automatic train control (ATC) system that
performs any Or all Of the functions Of
regulation, programmed stopping;, door control, performance
levelregulation, or other functions otherwise assigned to the train operator:
automatic train protection (ATP): The subsystem within the automatic train control (ATC)
that
maintains fail-safe protection against collisions, excessive speed, and other hazardous conditions through a
combination oftrain detection, train separation, and
interlocking:
automatic train supervision (ATS): The subsystem within the automatic train control (ATC)
that
monitors trains, adjusts the performance ofindividual trains to maintain schedules , and provides data to adjust
service to minimize inconveniences otherwise caused by iregularities。
NOTE
The ATS subsystem also typically includes manual and automatic
fuhctions
basic operating unit: (A) A single vehicle designed for independent operation. (B) A permanent Or semi-
permanent combination, designed for independent operation, consisting Of two Or more vehicles Of one or
more types
brake, (maximum) service: Anon-emergency brake
application that obtains the (maximum二
brake rate thatis
consistent with the design ofthe brake system, retrievable under the controlof master control。
brake, emergency: Fail-safe, open-loop braking to
complete stop, with an assured maximum stopping
distance considering all relevant factors. Once the brake application is initiated, it is typically irretrievable
(i.e.,it cannot be released until the train has stopped and a predefined time has passed):
car: See:vehicle。
civil speed limit: The maximum speed authorized for each section Of track, as determined primarily by the
alignment, profile, and structure。
communications-based train control (CBTC):
A continuous ATC system utilizing high-resolution train
location determination, idependent Of track circuits; continuous, high capacity, bidirectional train-to-
wayside low-latency data communications; and train-borne and wayside processors capable ofimplementing
Vital functions
IOIEEE Standards Dictionary Online is available at: http: /Idictionary.ieee.org. An IEEE account is required for access to the dictionary;
and one can be created at no charge on the
dictionary sign-in page.
Notes in text, tables and figures are given for information only and do not contain requirements needed to implement the standard.
13
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _
speed
System
System
routing

IEEE Std 1474.
TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
communications-based train control (CBTC) territory: the geographicalarea(s) ofa railnetwork equipped
for CBTC operation.
communications-based
train
control (CBTC)
USeI:
authority-authorized personnel
WhO
receive
information from, provide information to, orperform repairs or maintenance on, a CBTC system。
communications-based train control (CBTC) user interface: That portion of the human machine interface
i Which the CBTC user interacts with the CBTC system to observe andlor perform finctions implemented by
the CBTC system. Includes, butis not limited to, displays, audible indicators, tactile entries, cursor positioning
device implementations, and voice input devices.
communications-based train control (CBTC) user profiles: A definition of the vision; hearing; language
and physical characteristics ofthe CBTC user。
commuter rail: A passenger railroad service that operates within metropolitan areas on trackage that usually
is part Of the general railroad system. The operations, primarily for commuters, are generally run as part Ofa
regionalsystem thatis publicly owned or by a railroad company as part ofits overall service.
consist: The makeup or composition (number and specific identity) ofa basic operating unit or combination of
basic operating units ofa train_
control action: A request by
communications-based train control (CBTC) user for the CBTC system to
perform an operation。
A control action may
require
Single user input, Or
sequence Of user inputs, and
USEI
requested control action
be subject to verification checks
to the CBTC system performing the
requested operation
coupling: the function Of combining two consists into
a new communications-based train control (CBTC)
functional consist
display screen: The surface of a display device on Which the visual representation of data is presented.
driving mode: characterization of the manner in Which human train operators interact with the train control
system for operating
tain ranging from manual operation without reliance on the train control system to
fully automatic operation without reliance on human train operators_
dwell time: The tme
transit unit (vehicle or train) spends at a station Or StoP, measured as the interval
between its stopping and starting.
fail-safe: A design philosophy applied to safety-critical systems such that the result of hardware failure or the
effect Of software error shall either prohibit the system from assuming Or maintaining an unsafe state Or shall
cause the system to assume a state known to be safe.
function key: Assignable special purpose keys (e.8., on a computer keyboard, keypad or touchscreen) which
the communications-based train control (CBTC) user employs to interact with the CBTC system
headway: The time interval between the passing of the front ends of successive vehicles or trains moving
along the same lane or track in the same direction。
heavy rail transit: A mode ofrail rapid transit generally characterized by fully grade-separated construction,
operating on exclusive rights-of-way and station platforms at the
levelofthe vehicles。
human machine interface: an interface employing audible, visual andlor tactile devices, provide users with
access to the CBTC system to receive information and/or to enter commands。
14
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
Any
Prior
may
Hoor

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
interlocking: An arrangement Of switch, lock, and signal devices that is located where rail tracks cross, join;
separate, and so on. The devices are intercomnected in such a way that their movements succeed each other ia
predefined order; thereby preventing opposing or conflicting train movements。
Iight rail transit: A mode Of rail transit characterized by its ability to operate On exclusive rights-Of- way。
street
running, center reservation running, and grade crossings, and to board and discharge passengers at track
Or vehicle foor level.
location reference:
unique and unambiguous identifier Of a geospatial location within a reference location
system
mandatory: The referenced item is required to claim compliance with this standard
master control: The train-bore device or system directly providing the control signals (propulsion, coast;
and brake) to the train.
monorail: a railroad in Which the track consists Ofa single rail, typically elevated, with the trains suspended
from it or balancing On it。
movement
authority: The permission for a train to enter and travel through a specific section Of track, i a
given travel direction. Movement authorities are assigned, supervised, and enforced by a CBTC system to
maintain safe train separation and to provide protection of the train as it travels
the track。
movement authority limit: The boundaries within which the movement authority is permitted。
optional: The referenced item is not required to claim compliance with this standard. Implementation Of an
optionalitem shall be as defined in this standard。
page: A visual representation of data, graphics or text, that is presented on a display screen。
redundancy: The existence in a system Of more than one means Of accomplishing a given function。
reliability: The probability that a system Will perform its intended functions without failure, within design
parameters, under specific operating conditions, and for a specific period oftime_
safe braking model: An analytical representation of a train '$ performance while decelerating to a complete
StOP,
allowing for a combination Of worst-case influencing factors and failure scenarios。
CBTC-equipped
train shall stop in a distance equal to or less than that guaranteed by the safe braking model。
Safety critical: (A)
A term
t0
system Or function; the correct performance Of which is critical to
safety ofpersonnelandlor equipment. (B) Aterm applied to a system or function, the incorrect performance Of
Which may result in 8 hazard
NOTE
Vital functions are a subset of safety-critical functions
safety-related: Carries responsibility for safety。
self-revealing failure: Failures whose effects on system operation are immediately and clearly apparent。
service, revenue: (A-
Transit service excluding deadheading or layovers. (B)
Service scheduled for
passengertrips。
system safety: The application of engineering and management principles, criteria, and techniques to optimize
allaspects Ofsafety within the constraints of operationaleffectiveness, time, and cost, throughout allphases Of
the system life
15
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
along
applied
Any
cycle。

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
system safety program: The combined tasks and activities of system safety management and system safety
engineering that enhance operational effectiveness by satisfying the system safety requirements in a timely。
cost-effective manner throughout the system life
train: A consist ofone or more basic operating units_
traffic locking: Electric locking which prevents the manipulation of levers or other devices for changing the
direction oftraffic into a section oftrack on which a route is lined, occupied, or locked。
Un-coupling: the function Ofsplitting a consist into two new and separate CBTC functional consists。
unit: See:basic operating unit。
vehicle: A land conveyance assembly for
carrying Or transporting people and objects capable of traversing a
guideway, having structural integrity and general mechanical completeness, but not necessarily designed for
idependent operation.
vital function: A function in a safety-critical system that is required to be implemented in a fail-safe manner。
window: In graphical user interfaces, a defined portion of the display screen that is separated by a frame from
the rest ofthe screen and which may be opened, closed, resized and moved by the user。
3.2 Acronyms andabbreviations
APM
automated people mover
ATC
automatic train control
ATO
automatic train operation
ATP
automatic train protection
ATS
automatic train supervision
CBTC
Communications-based train control
GEBR
guaranteed emergency brake rate
MTBE
mean time between failure
MTBFE
mean time between functional failure
MTBHE
mcan time between hazardous event
MTTR
mean time to repair
MTTRS
mCan time tO restore service
O&SHA
operating and support hazard analysis
PHA
preliminary hazard analysis
SHA
system hazard analysis
SSHA
subsystem hazard analysis
SSPP
System Safety Program Plan
16
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _
cycle:

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
4.
General
requirements
4.1
Characteristics of CBTC systems
The primary characteristics Ofa CBTC system include the following:
High-resolution train location determination, independent of track circuits
b)
Continuous, high capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside low-latency data communications
Train-borne and wayside processors performing vital functions
4.2 Categorization of CBTC systems
This standard recognizes that different configurations of CBTC systems are possible; depending on the
specific application. For example, a CBTC system may provide the following:
Automatic train protection (ATP) functions only, withno automatic train operation (ATO)or automatic
train supervision (ATS) functions
b)
ATP functions, as well as certain ATO andlor ATS functions, as
required to satisfy the operational
needs ofthe specific application
typical functional block diagram for a CBTC system is given i Annex B。
4.3
Train Configurations
ACBTC system shallbe capable ofsupporting a variety oftrain configurations, including the following:
3 )
Fixed-length unidirectional trains comprised of one or more basic operating units
b)
Fixed-length bidirectional trains comprised of one or more basic operating units
Variable-length unidirectionaltrains
Variable-length bidirectional trains
ACBTC system shall be capable of supporting a mixed fleet oftrains, where specific trains, andlor classes Of
trains, have different performance characteristics.
4.4
Train operating modes
CBTC-equipped trains may be operated by either a single person Or a multi-person crew.A CBTC system may
also be required to support operation oftrains without crews
For operation oftrains with crews, the train operator will typically be stationed in the lead car of the train and
willbe responsible for moving the train from station to station. With a multi-person crew, the conductor(s 
will
normally operate from conductor position(s) within the train to operate the train 's doors_
ACBTC system shall
support single-person train operation by combining the conductor and train operator display information On
the train operator's
display. For multi-person crews, conductor display information shall also be provided on
separate conductor displays。
For the purposes Of this standard, operation of trains without crews includes both unattended and driverless
train operations. With unattended train operations, there would normally be no crew member onboard the
train. With driverless train operations, there may be a crew member onboard the train, but normally not in the
driving cab. This crew member, 让 present, would normally have no responsibility for operation of the train
except for failure recovery。
17
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
CBTC-equipped trains (including CBTC-equipped maintenance vehicles)
shall be capable of operating "
various modes, depending On whether the train is operating 证 CBTC territory Or non-CBTC territory, and
depending on the operational status ofthe train-borne andlor wayside CBTC equipment。
Mixed-mode operation shall also be considered
normal operating mode; to the extent specified by the
authority having jurisdiction. Mixed-mode operation is defined as the simultaneous operation within CBTC
territory of CBTC-equipped trains and trains that
arC
Iot
equipped with functional train-borne CBTC
equipment (icluding maintenance vehicles)。
Mixed-mode operation may be used 边 One Or more Of the
following ways:
A
regularly scheduled mode ofoperation within CBTC territory
b)
An
infrequent, unscheduled mode of operation within CBTC territory
During the transition period only, as a new CBTC system is cut-in
As a result oftrain-borne CBTC
equipment failures
4.4.1
Normal train operating modes in CBTC territory
4.4.1.1 CBTC-equipped trains
CBTC-equipped trains operating in CBTC territory shall operate, within ATP limits, under the protection Of
the CBTC system. The train shallbe capable ofbeing controlled manually by a train operator Or automatically
by the CBTC system (supervised by the train operator; 迕 present)。
35
specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
When operating automatically,
some functions (such as door operation
and train departure
iitiation) may continue to be the responsibility of the train operator and/or conductor(s) , ifpresent
4.4.1.2 Non-CBTC-equipped trains
Trains not equipped with train-borne CBTC equipment andlor trains with inoperative train-bore CBTC
equipment that are operating i CBTC territory shall operate under the protection of the CBTC system using
secondary train detection。
OI
supplementary systems andlor operating procedures, as specified by the
authority havingjurisdiction。
4.4.2 Failure mode train operations in CBTC territory
For light rail, heavy rail, monorail and commuter rail applications operating with crews, it is an operational
requirement to continue to move trains safely j the event Of CBTC equipment andlor data communication
failures, possibly at reduced operating speeds andlor increased operating headways when compared to normal
tain Operations. Consequently, a CBTC system shall be designed to support degraded modes of operation
i the event Of failure and to continue to provide ATP with minimum reliance On adherence to operating
procedures as specified by authority having jurisdiction。
For fully automated
applications operating without crews; the extent to which the CBTC system shall be
designed to support degraded modes Of operation in the event of failure shall be as defned by the authority
having jurisdiction, and may include an ability to remotely reset train-borne equipment and the ability to
support automatic pushlpull train recovery。 as well
as the
ability to support manual train operations and
alternative
routing strategies。
For al1
applications。
fallback plan; based on failure analysis and operating procedures, shall identify train
operating modes that will take advantage Of the degraded modes Of operation and recovery capabilities ofthe
CBTC system. The goalof the plan shall be to eliminate hazards to passengers and staff in accordance with
5.3, While continuing to provide passenger service。
18
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Specifically, failure mode train operations 证 CBTC territory shall address those CBTC system failures
affecting the following:
Alltrains operating within a particular area Ofcontrol
b)
Aparticular train operating within any area Of control
4.4.2.1
CBTC system failures affecting all trains operating within a particular area of control
In the event ofa CBTC system failure that affects all CBTC-equipped trains operating within a particular area
Of control within CBTC territory (e.8:, wayside CBTC equipment or wayside-to-train data communications
failure), trains shall have the capability to provide continued safe operations under the controlof an operator;
and the
following:
With the protection of a supplementary system (ifspecified by the authority havingjurisdiction); Or
b)
With the train
limited by the propulsion system; Or
Through strict adherence to operating procedures (as defined by authority havingjurisdiction); Or
Acombination ofany or allofitems a), b), and c).
When operating in this failure mode, ATP functions that reside within individual train-borne CBTC equipment
shall continue to function to the extent safety can be assured。
4.4.2.2 CBTC system failures affecting a particular train operating within any area of control
In the event ofa CBTC system failure
affecting
particular CBTC-equipped train operating within any area
Of control within CBTC territory (e.8., train-borne CBTC equipment failure), that train shall be capable Of
continued safe operations under the controlof an operator; and the following:
With the protection Ofa supplementary system (i specified by the authority having jurisdiction); Or
6)
With the train speed limited by the propulsion system; Or
Through strict adherence to operating procedures; Or
Acombination ofany or allofitems a), b), and c).
When operating in this failure mode, ATP functions that reside within wayside CBTC equipment and within
other train-borne CBTC
equipment shall continue to function to the extent safety can be assured。
4.4.3 Normal train operating modes in non CBTC territory
CBTC equipment installed on trains operating in non-CBTC territory shall include the necessary capabilities
to support transitions into CBTC territory. In addition, 迕
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, train
borne CBTC
equipmentmay also perform other ATP functions while operating in non-CBTC territory, such as
limiting train
andlor providing zero
detection。
Ifspecified by the authority havingjurisdiction, train-borne CBTC equipment operating in non-CBTCterritory
may also interface with wayside equipment thatis not fully compatible with the train-bome CBTC equipment。
Inno case, however, shall the train-bore CBTC equipment provide an indication ofstandard CBTC operation
when operating in non-CBTC territory, unless the
applicable authority
Or authorities
having jurisdiction
over the train-bornc and
wayside equipment have ensured that standard CBTC operation is supported by the
integrated train-bore and wayside systems_
19
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
speed
speed
speed

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
4.4.4 Failure mode train operations in non-CBTC territory
Except where specified to perform certain ATP functions while operating in non-CBTC territory, failure ofthe
tain-borne CBTC equipment shall have minimal impact on train operation. The failure shall be indicated to
the train operator; i present
4.5 Enteringlexiting CBTC territory
4.5.1
Entering into CBTC territory
ACBTC system shall have precise knowledge of the limits of CBTC territory and shall include the capability
to perform verification checks Of the train-borne CBTC equipment
to
entering CBTC territory. The
checks shall be performed sufficiently in advance Of
into CBTC territory to verify the proper operation
ofthe train-borne CBTC equipment (including any wayside CBTC equipment dependencies):
Ifthe verification check is passed, an indication to this effect shall be provided. Under normal circumstances
and subject to ATP constraints, i shall not be necessary for a train to come to
Stop When entering CBTC
territory unless required for other operational reasons
In the event that the verification check fails, an indication of the CBTC system failure shall be provided, and
the train Shall be
capable of continued safe operations under the controlofan operator; and
With the protection of a supplementary system (ifspecified by the authority havingjurisdiction); Or
b)
With the train
limited by the propulsion system; Or
Through strict adherence to operating procedures (as defined by authority having jurisdiction); Or
Acombination ofany or allofitems a), b), and c).
'The results of the verification checks shall be displayed on the ATS user interface. For trains operating with
crewS, the results ofthe verification checks shall also be indicated to the train operator:
4.5.2 Exiting from CBTC territory
For trains operating with crews,
t0
exiting CBTC territory。
CBTC system may provide a visual
indication to the train operator oftime and/or distance until the train willbe
exiting the CBTC territory. When
known by the CBTC system, the train operator may also receive an indication Of the type of train control
system into Which the train will be traversing:
NOTE
Indications to the train operator may not be required 让 the transition between CBTC territory and non-CBTC
territory is operationally transparent to the train operator. Under normal circumstances and subject to ATP constraints, i
is not necessary for a train to come to a Stop When
CBTC territory unless required for other operationalreasons。
4.6
Train operating speeds
ACBTC system shall be capable of meeting the performance and functional requirements of this standard,
over the fullrange of_
possible train operating speeds specified by the authority havingjurisdiction。
20
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
Prior
entry
speed
Prior
exiting

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
5.
Performance requirements
5.1
CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways
The required design and operating headways (i.e., the minimum and scheduled headways) for both normal
and reverse directions shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction. Headway may be specified as
uninterfered andlor interfered.
In all cases, the design headway shall be constrained by the safe train separation requirements and the safe
braking modelof 6.1.2.1.
In the case Of an uninterfered headway, a train speed profile shall not be affected by a preceding train. All
trains shall, therefore, perform at the maximum allowed speed, depending on the civil speed limits and the
acceleration and braking capabilities ofthe trains themselves. Operation at uninterfered headways facilitates a
minimum end-to-end trip time for a given set ofstation dwelltimes。
Headways may be reduced (at the expense Of increased trip times) with an interfered headway where a train
speed profile is affected by a preceding train such that a following train decelerates on the approach to a station
and enters the station area at a reduced speed. Interfered headway may also be specified to support multiple
berthings at a station platform。
The design headway for a particular line and a particular set of vehicles involves many factors that are out-
side the controlof the CBTC system (e.8:, track alignment, gradients, civilspeed limits, train acceleration and
braking rates, station dwell times, terminal track configurations, driver reaction times).
These factors shall be
specified by the authority havingjurisdiction . These standard addresses only those CBTC factors contributing
to achievable headways, Of which the most significant are the following:
Location (both accuracy Of measured end-of-train locations and resolution of movement authority
limits for a given train), including the frequency at which location reports and movement authorities
aTC
updated.
b)
Speed, including both accuracy of speed measurement and resolution of speed limits established for a
given train at a given location。
Communications
including nominal and worst-case transmission times Of commandlstatus
Iessages
between
wayside and train; and
Vice
Versa。 (Commandlstatus
mnessages  include; for
example, messages related to movement authority updates andlor location report updates:.)
CBTC equipmentreaction times, including maximum error accumulation, for both wayside and train-
borne equipment, and for various operating modes, as
applicable. (CBTC equipment reaction times
include, for example, the time required to establish new movement authority limits following location
report updates, the time to establish new movement authority limits through an interlocking, and the
time to determine a new ATP
profile following movement authority update.)
CBTC system performance limitations
the maximum number oftrains that can be processed by
the CBTC system, within a given area ofcontrol)_
CBTC automatic speed regulation algorithm。
Typical values for the CBTC parameters in items a) through e) are given in Amnex C.
5.2 CBTCfactors contributing to achievable trip times
Triptimerequirements shallbe specified by the authority havingjurisdiction, consistent with train performance
and track alignment characteristics。
21
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
delays,
(e.8,

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
The minimum end-to-end trip times for a defined set ofstation dwell times results from uninterfered
headway
profiles. The CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways, as identified in 5.1, are also factors
contributing to the minimum achievable trip times。
5.3 System safety requirements
5.3.1
CBTC System Safety Program requirements
System Safety Program shall be instituted during the CBTC system planningldesign phase and shall
continue throughout the system life
The CBTC System Safety Program shall emphasize the prevention
Ofaccidents by identifying and resolving hazards 边
systematic manner. A CBTC System Safety Program
Plan (SSPP) shall be developed for each CBTC application. The CBTC SSPP;as a minimum, shall be prepared
i accordance with the requirements OfE.1of Annex E_
Implementation of the CBTC SSPP shall specifically recognize configuration management issues, given the
importance Of software and hardware configuration control in maintaining system safety。
5.3.2 CBTChazard identification and risk assessment process
Hazard analyses shall be
employed during the design Ofa CBTC system to assist in the identification and
evaluation of potential hazards to assess their likelihood and severity and to document their resolution_
As a
minimum, 8 preliminary hazard analysis (PHA 
shall be conducted for each new CBTC system project. Other
detailed analyses, including systemlsubsystem hazard analyses, failure modes, effects and criticality analyses;
fault tree analyses, and operational and support hazard analyses, shall also be conducted if man- dated by
the CBTC SSPR. These analyses shall be conducted in accordance with E.2,E.3,E.4, and E.5 Of Annex E Or
equivalentrequirements, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction。
Allhazards identified through the CBTC System Safety Program shall be assessed in terms of the severity Or
consequence ofthe hazard and the probability ofoccurrence. This shallbe accomplished in generalaccordance
with the criteria outlined in E.6 of Annex Eor the equivalent, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction。
Risk assessment estimates shall be used as the basis 证 the
decision-making process to determine whether
individual system or subsystem hazards shall be eliminated, mitigated, or accepted . This process shallinclude
full documentation of the hazard resolution activities.
Hazards shall be resolved through
design process that emphasizes the elimination of the hazard。
The
effectiveness ofthe hazard resolution strategies and countermeasures shall be monitored to determine that no
ICW hazards are
introduced. In addition, whenever substantive changes are made to the system, analyses shall
be conducted to identify and resolve any new hazards_
As a
minimum, a CBTC system shall address the following criticallcatastrophic system hazards through the
implementation ofthe ATP functions defined i 6.1
Train-to-train
collisions
(rear-end, sideswipe, head-on);
hazard
t0
be addressed through
train
separation assurance (see 6.1.2), rollback protection (see 6.1.4), parted train protection (see 6.1.6),
route
interlocking protection (see 6.1.11), and travel direction reversal interlocks (see 6.1.12)
b)
Train-to-structure collisions; hazard to be addressed through end-of-track protection (see 6.1.5) and
restricted route protection (see 6.1.16)
Irain derailments; hazard to be addressed through overspeed protection (see 6.1.3 ), route interlocking
protection (see 6.1.11), and (where specified by the authority havingjurisdiction) broken rail detection
(see 6.1.14)
22
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
Speed
cycle。

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Collisions between trains and highway vehicles
where highway crossing at grade exists within the
limits Of CBTC territory); hazard to be addressed through grade-crossing warning devices that may
include interfaces to the CBTC system (see 6.1.15)
Hazards to work crews and work trains; hazards to be addressed through CBTC work zone protection
functions (see 6.1.13 )
Hazards to passengers associated with train movement with train doors open; hazards to be addressed
throughinterface between the CBTC system and the train door system ( where required by the authority
having jurisdiction) to provide door opening control protection interlocks (see 6.1.8),
ZCIO
detection (see 6.1.7), platform interlocks (see 6.1.9) and where applicable, hazards to passengers
associated withtrain movement with platform edge doors open
Hazards associated with collisions with objects on the track; hazards to be addressed through interfaces
between the CBTC system and restricted route protections
where specified by the authority having
jurisdiction) (see 6.1.16)
5.3.3 CBTC vital functions
To eliminate Or control to
level acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction those hazards judged to be
unacceptable or undesirable through the risk assessment process Of 5.3.2,a CBTC system shall include, as a
minimumm, the Vital functions identified i 6.1.
All vital functions of
CBTC system shall be designed and implemented i accordance
with fail-safe
principles. Documentation ofthe means used, and Proof that fail-safe principles have been met and the mean
time between hazardous event (MTBHE) requirements 0f 5.3.4 have been satisfied, shallbe required for every
CBTC system。
Verification that the processor-based Portions
Of
CBTC
meet these
minimum system safety
requirements shallbe completed in accordance with IEEE Std 1483-2000.12
5.3.4
Quantitative CBTC safety performance requirements
For any CBTC system application, the CBTC wayside and train-borne equipment located within any
contiguous portion Of a one-way route that can be traversed by a train traveling at the specified maximum
authorized speed for one hour or less shall have a total calculated aggregate MTBHE (total ofall critical and
catastrophic hazards) ofat least 109 operating hours. This includes the maximum number ofother trains that
can be located in this contiguous portion Of a one-way route under the specified peak operating headway。
System safety documentation shall support these calculations and substantiate the
methodology used to arrive
at the result. For the purposes of MTBHE calculations,
3 hazardous event shall
iclude, as a minimum, the
occurrence Ofany ofthe specific hazards identified in 5.3.2。
NOTE
Ifthe end-to-end trip time for a given route is
than
h, the MTBHE requirement for that route would be
adjusted proportionately. As an illustrative example, i the specified end-to-end trip time (per 5.2) for a given one-way
route is 2h, and i the route includes 4 sets of
wayside CBTC equipment, and ia maximum Of 10 trains can be operating
on the route at a given time (when operating at the specified peak headway, per 5.1), then the MTBHE of the combined
4 sets of
wayside CBTC equipment and 10 sets of train-bore CBTC equipment on that route would be at least 0.5
109
operating hours
Inforration on references can be found in Clause 2
23
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _
speed
System
greater

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
5.3.5 Basic safety design principles
5.3.5.1
Normal transit system operations with no CBTC hardware failures
A CBTC system shall respond safely and correctly perform all ATP functions within the normal range Of
inputs and other operating and environmental conditions
All conditions necessary for the existence Of any
permissive state Or action shall be verified to be present
before the permissive state Or action is initiated by a CBTC system. The requisite conditions shall be verified
to be continuously present for the permissive state Or action to be maintained.
System safety shallnot depend on the correctness ofactions taken or procedures used by operating personnel。
Procedures shall not be considered
substitute for safety functions that are to be vested i specific CBTC
components or equipment, or secondary train detection systems_
5.3.52
Abnormal transit system operations with no CBTC hardware failures
ACBTC system shallrespond safely under conditions of abnormalsystem loading, abnormallimproper inputs,
and other abnormal external influences such as electrical, mechanical, and environmental factors.
ACBTC system shallrespond safely to abnormal conditions as required by the authority having jurisdiction。
5.3.5.3 Responseto CBTC hardware failures
ACBTC system shallrespond safely under conditions of credible hardware failure.
NOTE
The AREMA Communications and Signals Manual, Part 17.3.3 [B1]13, provides examples of credible hardware
failures
Failure to perform
logical operation or absence Of a logical input, output, or decision shall not cause an
unsafe condition, i.e., system safety shallnot depend upon the occurrence Of an action or logical decision。
Hazard analyses shall consider all credible CBTC hardware failure modes. Justification shall be provided
for conceivable failure modes that are not considered credible. Each credible CBTC failure mode shall be
classified as a combination Of either self-revealing Or non-self-revealing; and the effect shall be considered as
followS:
3 )
No credible single
CBTC hardware failure, whether self-revealing Or non-self-revealing; shall
CauSC an unsafc condition_
b)
No credible CBTC hardware failure i combination with one Or more
non-self-revealing failure shall
Cause an unsafe condition. In the instance ofa
non-self-revealing failure;
subsequent failure shallnot
be considered independent。
The probability Ofa criticalor catastrophic hazard arising as a result Of combinations of simultaneous
idependent self-revealing failures shall be considered in the calculated CBTC MTBHE.
5.3.5.4 Recovery from CBTC hardware failures
combination Of functional elements of the CBTC system itself;, supplementary systems (i specified by the
authority having jurisdiction ), andlor operating procedures shall provide for the safety Of train movement
under failure conditions, including failure recovery:
The numbers in brackets correspond to those ofthe bibliography i AnnexA-
24
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
point

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
5.4 Systemassurance requirements
5.4.1
General
The ability Of a CBTC system to accomplish the functional requirements Of this standard, under normal
conditions and under conditions of equipment failure, is of paramount importance to the authority having
jurisdiction. This sub clause establishes qualitative reliability, availability, and maintainability criteria for
CBTC systems and
equipment i order to
mect Or exceed the on-time
performance and fleet availability
objectives Of the authority having jurisdiction, and thereby minimize delays experienced by passengers. 皿
addressing CBTC equipment failures, a distinction shall be made between the following failure types:
Type 1: Those failures, or combination Of failures, that impact on-time performance Of the transit
system。
b)
Type 2: Those failures, or combination of failures, that do not impact on-time performance Of the
transit system, but do result in some other Ioss of
specified CBTC functionality。
Type 3: Those failures that do not impact on-time performance Of the transit system or result in a loss
ofany
specifed CBTC functionality
because Ofequipment redundancy).
The CBTC system availability requirement (see 5.4.2) shall include consideration Of all Type 1 failures, as
wellas the mean time to restore service (MTTRS) for Type 1 failures。
The CBTC system mean time between functional failure (MTBFE) requirement (see 5.4.3) shall include
considerationofall Type 1 and Type 2 failures。
The CBTC system mean time between failure (MTBE ) requirement (see 5.4.3 ) shall include consideration Of
all Type 1, Type 2, and Type 3 failures。
While system availability。
MTBFE, and system MTBF predictions traditionally consider only hard-
WarC
failures, measurements Of achieved system availability, system MTBFE, and system MTBF shall also
consider software errors (i.e., software fails to perform intended function) as well as hardware failures。
The
following generalrecommended practices apply:
Components and materials should be selected and appropriate standards of quality control and test
procedures should be employed to obtain the lowest practical hardware failure rates for individual
iems OfCBTC equipment (i.e., maximize the hardware portion ofthe system MTBF)。
Unless non-redundant
equipment is sufficiently reliable to satisfy the overall system availability
requirements, appropriate levels Of equipment redundancy should be employed such that the failure
Of
Single component, Processor;
Or device does not render the CBTC system unavailable Or an
operationally-critical function nonoperative (i.e., maximize the system MTBFF):
ACBTC system should incorporate degraded modes Of operation to minimize the operational impacts
Of equipment failures and
to
permit train movements
to continue safely (i.e., maximize system
availability)。
CBTC system downtime or unavailability Of an operationally-critical function should be minimized
through the use Oflocal and remote diagnostic capabilities and appropriate operating and maintenance
procedures [i.e., minimize mean time to repair (MTTR)].
25
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
(e.8,
System

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
5.4.2 System availability requirements
Quantitative CBTC system availability requirements shall be established by the authority having jurisdiction
with
appropriate consideration ofthe impacts of CBTC system and subsystem failures on the operation ofthe
transit system. Typical methods for defining CBTC system availability are provided in Annex E。
As
specified by the authority havingjurisdiction, system availability analysislmodeling shall be used to predict
the system availability for a given CBTC system configuration, based on equipmentreliability/ maintainability
calculations, equipment redundancy provisions, and other defined assumptions_
As
specified by the authority havingjurisdiction, system availability demonstration tests shall be performed to
determine actual CBTC system availability over a defined period, to a given confidence level。
5.4.3 Equipment reliability requirements
Quantitative CBTC system and subsystem MTBF and MTBFF requirements shall be established by the
authority havingjurisdiction, consistent with the CBTC system availability requirement of5.4.2.
5.4.3.1
Design life
CBTC system shallhave a design life ofa minimum 30 years。
NOTE
The
ability Ofa CBTC system to remain in operation to the end of its design life is driven largely by long-term
availability Of spare parts and the state Of
repair and maintenance plans. Specific requirements with respect to spare
part availability are defined by the authority having jurisdiction and do not form part of this standard。
5.4.4 Equipment maintainability requirements
ACBTC system shall be designed to minimize required maintenance (predictive, preventive, and corrective)
by maximizing the system MTBE and by including features that provide for
eaSe
Of maintenance by
maintenance Personnel.
The mean time to repairlreplace a failed piece of in-service CBTC equipment (i.e., first-level repair) shall
include on-site diagnostics, the replacement of failed components, and the testing Of the repaired units, sub-
system, Or system, but shall exclude travel time to the site_
A separate MTTR requirement may be defined for
second-levelrepair (ie.,
repairofa failed line replaceable unit).
The first-level MTTR shallbe no greater than 30 min. The second-level MTTR,ifspecified, shallbe no greater
than 2h
Achievable repair times is driven by equipment diagnostic provisions and available test equipment, as wellas
the quality Ofthe maintenance manuals and training:ACBTC system shall, therefore, iclude maintenance and
diagnostic capabilities to detect and react to CBTC equipment failures. This shall include remote diagnostics
capabilities as well as local built-in test equipment and other fault displays for trouble- shooting; and the
timely identification of failed components and functions。
Data logging capabilities shallalso be provided in wayside and train-borne CBTC equipment. The logged data
Shall be
capable of being analyzed to be able to recreate the sequence Of events leading to an incident. This
allows maintenance personnel to identify the cause Of any failure andlor mis-operation Of CBTC equipment
that cannot be identified by the in-built diagnostics of the equipment. The scope and duration of logged CBTC
events shallbe established by the authority having jurisdiction。
A CBTC system design shall include capabilities to permit periodic verification Of ATP hardware, software;
and data, including verification Of correct response to interference on the train-to-wayside data link. To the
extent
specified by the authority having jurisdiction;
CBTC system shallalso include capabilities to facilitate
26
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
good
shop '

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
modifications (by the user) to CBTC system parameters, track databases, and
applications software. The
supplierofthe CBTC system shallidentify to the authority havingjurisdiction those specific changes to CBTC
system parameters, track databases, and applications software that have no impact on system safety。
WARNING
Changes made to CBTC system parameters, track databases, and
application software, other than those
identified by the supplier as not impacting safety, can affect safe system operation. Prior to implementing
any such changes, applicable hazard analyses 0f 5.3.2 shall be reassessed to verify that the modified system
willstillmeet allrequirements ofthis standard
including, but not limited to, 5.3.3,5.3.4, and 5.3.5. Changes
shallbe implemented in accordance with the CBTC SSPP 0f 5.3.1.
5.5 Environmental requirements
Train-borne CBTC equipment shall comply with the requirements Of IEEE Std 1478-2013.
Wayside CBTC equipment shallbe in accordance with requirements set by authority having jurisdiction。
6.
Functional requirements
ACBTC system shall include the capability for providing ATP,ATO, and ATS functions. ATP functions shall
provide fail-safe protection
collisions, excessive speed, and other hazardous conditions. ATP functions
shallhave precedence over both the ATO and ATS functions. ATO functions shall control basic operations that
would otherwise be performed by a train operator and shall do so within the protection limits imposed by ATR:
ATS functions shall provide system status information and the means to monitor and over- ride the automatic
control for various functions ofthe system
The CBTC train-to-
wayside communications interface shall be sufficient to support all required ATP; ATO
and ATS functions
The data link shall provide continuous geographic coverage within CBTC territory and
shall support train operations i tunnels, tubes, and cuts, on elevated structures, and at grade. The data link
shall support bidirectional data transfer and shall exhibit sufficiently low latency to support the defined
performance requirements. Ihe data link shall include a protocol structure to support safe, timely, and secure
delivery oftrain control messages.
6.1
ATP functions
AllATP functions shall be vital functions and shall be designed and implemented in accordance with 5.3.A
CBTC system shall be capable ofproviding bidirectionalATP:
6.1.1
Train locationltrain speed determination
6.1.1.1 CBTCtrain locationltrain speed determination
CBTC train locationltrain speed determination shall be
required ATP function for any CBTC system
configuration
ACBTC system shallestablish the location, speed, and travel direction ofeach CBTC-equipped train operating
证 CBTC territory。
CBTC train location determination shall safely and accurately establish the location of both the front and rear
ofthe train. The CBTC train location determination function shall provide sufficient train location resolution
and accuracy to support the performance and safety requirements Of this standard. Train location resolution
and accuracy parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C
27
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
against

IEEE Std 1474.
TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
The CBTC train location determination function shall be
self-initializing and shall automatically detect and
establish the location and length of each CBTC-equipped train as it enters CBTC territory and on recovery
from CBTC equipment failures, without requiring manual input oftrain location or train length data。
When awakening from sleep mode, CBTC equipment shallmaintain or vitally re-establish train location。
The CBTC train
determination function shall provide sufficient speed measurement resolution and
accuracy to support the performance and safety requirements of this standard. Speed measurement resolution
and accuracy parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Amnex C_
CBTC system shall compensate
the effects of measurement inaccuracies On train location and
determination. Specifically, ithe CBTC train locationlspeed determination function is dependent upon wheel
rotation, the CBTC system shall correct for position errors induced by the slipping or
sliding Of wheels and
shallcorrect for position errors caused by variation in wheelsize due to wear, trueing; orreplacement_
6.1.1.2 Secondary train location determination
Ifspecified by the authority having jurisdiction, secondary train detection technology may be used to establish
ia section Oftrack is occupied by one or more trains,
icluding trains not equipped with train-bore CBTC
equipment and/or trains with inoperative train-borne CBTC equipment. This may be provided as part Of
supplementary systems or directly input or integrated into the CBTC system. It will not be necessary to
determine the location ofnon-CBTC-equipped trains, ortrains with inoperative train-borne CBTC equipment,
to the same accuracy as CBTC-equipped trains。
6.1.2 Safetrain
separation
Safe train separation shallbe a
required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration_
Safe train separation shall be provided between alltrains operating in CBTC territory, whether or not the trains
are CBTC equipped。
ACBTC system shallprovide safe train separation between CBTC-equipped trains. Safe train separation shall
be based upon the principle ofan instantaneous (brick wall) stop ofthe preceding train.
For mixed-mode operation (see 4.4), safe train separation shall be provided through supplementary systems
andlor through strict adherence to operating procedures, as specified by the authority havingjurisdiction。
Ifsecondary train location determination is provided (see 6.1.1.2), then for a CBTC-equipped train following
non-CBTC-equipped train or a train with inoperative train-borne CBTC equipment, a CBTC system shall
limit the movement authority Of the following train to the boundary Of the section of track occupied by the
IOn-
CBTC-equipped or failed train. If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, the CBTC system may
further limit the movement authority to the route
point ofa route occupied by the non-CBTC-equipped
train Or failed train_
The CBTC safe train separation finction shall consist of the following:
The calculation ofthe ATP profile (i.e., the profile of safe speed as a function oftrain location), derived
from fixed ATP data
permanent speed limits) and variable ATP data
temporary speed limits
and movement authority limit)
b)
The supervision and enforcement ofthe ATP profile calculated by the CBTC system
The ATP profile shall be governed by
safe braking model (see 6.1.2.1) and shall ensure that under no
circumstances (including failures) will the movement authority limit be exceeded by a CBTC-equipped train。
28
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
Speed
for
Speed
entry
(e.8,
(C.8,

IEEE Std 1474.
TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
The movement
authority limit shall be the most restrictive of the following:
The rear Of
CBTC-equipped train ahead (as determined by the CBTC train location function 边
6.1.1.1), with allowance for any location uncertainty
b)
The boundary ofa section oftrack occupied by anon-CBTC-equipped train or a train with inoperative
train-borne CBTC equipment
as determined by a secondary train detection system, i provided, per
6.1.1.2)
The end-of-track (see 6.1.5)
The entrance tO an
interlocking; when the route is not verified as aligned and locked (see 6.1.11)
The boundary of a section Of track with an opposing authorized travel direction or conflicting routing
established
see 6.1.12)
廿
The boundary Ofa blocked track (see 6.1.13)
8
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, the entrance tO
highway
crossing where
warning devices are not confirmed to be operating (see 6.1.15)
h)
The entrance to a route that is detected to be unsafe for train movement (see 6.1.16)
I
specified by the authority having jurisdiction; the CBTC safe train separation function shall support
automatic close-up oftrains and automatic coupling and uncoupling oftrains in designated areas_
I
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided to bypass the CBTC safe train
separation function to allow
train, under the control of
8 train Operator; to travel
beyond its movement
authority limit (e.8., at a restricted speed).
I specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided to
back (i.e., make more
restrictive) a movement authority limit previously granted to a train. If the train were approaching Or braking
toward the original movement authority limit, the train may be in violation of the new ATP profile. Under
such circumstances, a CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake application. The brake
application may
be an immediate emergency brake application Or a
supervised service brake application, as specified by the
authority having jurisdiction (see 6.1.3).
6.1.2.1
Safe braking model
safe braking model shall be developed for each CBTC
application。
The safe braking modelshall, as a minimum, include consideration of the following:
Location uncertainty Of lead train (including rollback tolerance)
b)
Train length
Train configuration (see 4.3)
4)
Allowable overspeed permitted by the CBTC system
Maximum CBTC speed measurement error
廿
CBTC system reaction times and latencies
8)
Maximum train acceleration rate possible at the time an overspeed condition is detected by the CBTC
system
h)
Worst-case reaction times to disable the propulsion system and apply the emergency brakes following
detection ofan overspeed condition by the CBTC system
j
Guaranteed emergency brake rate (GEBR)
j
Grade
29
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
grade
Pull

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
The GEBR shall be the minimum emergency brake rate achieved by a train on level tangent track under the
range Of environmental conditions and worst-case credible latent brake equipment failure modes, Which can
be anticipated to exist for that train in the specific application. The GEBR shall be specified by the authority
having jurisdiction and shall include consideration Of maximum train load, minimum anticipated adhesion
levels, and maximum design tailwind。
typicalsafe braking modelis provided in Annex D.
ACBTC system shall have the capability to support multiple safe braking models to accommodate different
train
acceleration/braking rates for different classes and configurations Of trains operating simultaneously
within CBTC territory
and
t0
accomnmodate
automatic   close-UP
and
automatic   couplingluncoupling
capabilities, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. A CBTC system shall incorporate appropriate
protection to ensure that the correct safe
braking modelis
for a
giventrain at a given location。
6.1.3 Overspeed protection and brake assurance
Overspeed protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration.
I
establishing; supervising, and enforcing the ATP profile, as governed by the safe braking modelof 6.1.2.1,a
CBTC system shallensure that under no circumstances, including failures, the train 's actualspeed exceeds its
safe speed. The safe speed shallbe derived by considering the most restrictive ofthe following:
The permanent
limits on sections Oftrack within the ATP profile
b)
temporary
restrictions on sections oftrack within the ATP profile
Permanent
restriction applicable to the particular class or configuration oftrain
restrictions enforced on the train because oftrain-borne failure conditions
The maximum
that would allow the train to stop safely prior to the limit ofthe train s movement
authority Or to slow down sufficiently to meet
appropriate permanent or temporary
restrictions
UPon
entering that section oftrack
Speed limits and restrictions shall apply When any portion of the train is within the
limit area. Speed
limitlspeed restriction resolution parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C.
Enforcement of the calculated ATP profile shall be achieved by comparing the CBTC-determined train speed
with the ATP profile speed at the CBTC-determined train location. If the ATP profile
at that location is
exceeded, the CBTC system shallinitiate an immediate brake application。
The brake
application may be an immediate emergency brake
application
OI
supervised service brake
application, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. In the latter case, a CBTC system shall monitor
te achieved brake rate to determine that a1
acceptable brake rate is achieved within
predetermined
time frame; if not, it shall immediately apply the emergency brakes。
The safe
braking model shall include
appropriate allowances for reaction times associated with this brake assurance function。
6.1.4 Rollback protection
Rollback protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration。
ACBTC system shall monitor actual train travel direction and shall compare measured travel direction with
te authorized travel direction. Train motion against the authorized travel direction for more than a specified
rollback tolerance (distance, optional velocity) shallresult in the CBTC system initiating an emergency brake
application. Rollback detection criteria for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C
30
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
applied
Speed
Any
Speed
Any
speed
Any
speed
speed
speed
Speed
speed

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6.1.5 End-of-track protection
End-of-track protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration that permits the
operation oftrains uP to, or in close proximity to, an end-of-track terminus。
End-of-track protection shall be incorporated
Or function i conjunction with, overspeed protection to
prevent trains
over-traveling the end-of-track or, if buffers are specified, to prevent trains from exceeding
the design limits for impact with an end-of-track buffer. End-of-track protection design shall be based on the
safe braking modelof 6.1.2.1.
6.1.6 Parted train protection and coupling and uncoupling of trains
Where separate vehicles can be coupled together in a consist oftwo or more vehicles or units to form a train, a
CBTC system shall have the capability Of detecting and protecting
trains. Parted train protection shall
be required regardless of whether the individual vehicles or units are considered to be permanently coupled or
whether
are
routinely uncoupled for maintenance or operationalpurposes。
A CBTC system shall also support operating requirements for coupling and uncoupling Of trains, including
automatic update ofthe consist length within the CBTC system_
Ifspecified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system may assume a fixed, worst-case, maximum
tain length for a given class oftrains operating 证 CBTC territory, with a reliance on operating procedures to
ensure this maximum train length is not exceeded.
6.1.7
Zero speed detection
Zero
detection Shall be a
required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration and shall be i
accordance with the
requirements 0f5.10 OfIEEE Std 1475-2012.
Zero
detection criteria for typical CBTC systems and applications are included in Annex C.
6.1.8 Train door protection
6.1.8.1
Door opening control protection interlocks
Iftrains are operated with crews, door open control protection interlocks may be a required ATP function, at the
option of the authority having jurisdiction. For operation oftrains without crews, door open control protection
interlocks shall be mandatory. These interlocks, if provided, shall be such that the following conditions are
satisfied
t0
enabling the opening Ofthe train doors (and platform doors, i fitted):
Thetrainis "properly aligned' ata designated stopping point, where the designated stopping pointand
required tolerances shall be as specified by the authority havingjurisdiction。
b)
There is a platform (or other location specified by the authority having jurisdiction) on the side of the
train for which the door opening is allowed。
Zero speed is detected, in accordance with 6.1.7.
The train is constrained against motion。
For
applications where the train length exceeds usable platform length, selective door open enable
shallprevent enabling doors not aligned with platform。
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided for a local manual bypass Of the
preceding door open control protection interlocks, for failure recovery purposes
31
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
into,
from
parted
they
speed
Speed
Prior

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6.1.8.2 Emergency Evacuation Door Release
Ifrequired by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall support emergency evacuation in areas
between stations. Door release shallonly be allowed for side with a designated emergency walkway。
6.1.8.3 Uncommandedtrain door opening
Automatic response to an uncommanded train door opening event may be a
required ATP function, at the
option ofthe authority having jurisdiction。
This function, i provided, shall continuously monitor the closed and locked status Of all passenger doors On
each car Of the train and shall provide a safe reaction 让 at any time 让 cannot be confirmed that all passenger
doors are closed and locked when
are
being commanded closed。
The safe reaction to be taken by the CBTC system upon detection of an uncommanded train door opening
event shallbe specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
6.1.9
Platform Interlocks
6.1.9.1
Departure Interlocks
I trains are operated with crews, departure interlocks may be 8
 required ATP function, at the option Ofthe
authority havingjurisdiction。
For operation of trains without crews, departure interlocks shall be mandatory。
These interlocks, where required, shallprevent a stationary train
moving
by disablingthepropulsion
system and apply brakes) unless all train doors (and platform edge doors, i fitted) are properly closed and
locked, in accordance with the requirements Of 5.14 OfIEEE Std 1475-2012.
Ifa platform edge door to train door intrusion system is provided for a gap between train and platform edge
door; in the event ofintrusion detected, the CBTC system shall prevent train from departing:
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided for a local manual bypass Of the
preceding departure interlocks, for failure recovery purposes_
6.1.9.2
Arrival Interlocks
I trains are operated with crews, arrival interlocks may be
required ATP function, at the Option Of the
authority having jurisdiction。
For operation of trains without crews, arrival interlocks shall be mandatory。
These interlocks, where required shall function as follows:
Ifplatform edge doors are not closed and locked, train movement into station shall be prevented。
b)
Ifan intrusion system is provided, in the event of intrusion detected, the CBTC system shall prevent
train
entering station
Ifs
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided for a local manual bypass
Ofthe preceding arrival interlocks, for failure recovery purposes。
32
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
they
fron
(e.8,
from

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6.1.10Emergency braking
The train 's emergency brake system shall be capable ofbringing the train to a stop within the assured stopping
distance determined by the safe braking model of 6.1.2.1. Specific criteria for resetting the emergency brakes
to allow normal operation to resume shall be
specified by the authority having jurisdiction. If conditions (as
determined by ATP) are not correct for train movement, the emergency braking shallremain
regardless
Of any reset signals or actions, except that facilities may be provided for
local manual bypass of the ATP
functions for that train to permit manual train operation for failure recovery purposes. Use Of such facilities
shall require strict adherence to operating procedures to provide for the safety oftrain movements. If correct
ATP conditions exist after the emergency brakes have been reset, the train shall be permitted to move Or
continue to move; however; i the actual train speed
exceeds the ATP profile speed or
subsequent
malfunction OcCUrS, emergency
braking shallbe
as before.
6.1.11
Route interlocking
CBTC system shall provide route interlocking functions equivalent to conventional interlocking practice
to prevent train collisions and derailments. These functions shall include locking of the route 边 advance Of
the train entering the interlocking (time or approach locking) and once the train is i the interlocking (route
locking). The switches shall also be locked when the track section containing the switch is occupied by a
train (detector
locking). Locking functions shall also apply to moveable bridges and similar right-of-way
apparatus. Sectionalrelease (ofroutes behind a train ) may be provided where specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
NOTE
The AREMA Communications and Signals Manual, Sections 2 and 16 [81], provides examples ofrecommended
practices for use in interlocking design。
A movement
authority shallnot be advanced into an interlocking until the
appropriate route is set and locked。
Once
3 Iovement
authority has been advanced through an interlocking; the affected route shall not be
released, and
conflicting routes cleared unless either the train has traveled through and is verified clear of the
interlocking orthe movement authority is pulled back short ofthe interlocking andis in effect。
When
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, interlocking functions may be provided by separate
interlocking equipment, which is based on train position established by a secondary train detection subsystem。
In this case, a CBTC system shall interface to and may modify the conventional interlocking functions based
ontrain position established by the CBTC train location determination function, to safely enable the enhanced
performance capabilities Ofa CBTC system to be realized。
6.1.11.1
CBTC interfaces to a separate interlocking
Ifa separate interlocking is specified, a CBTC system shallinterface to interlockings as follows:
Time or approach locking shallapply, except in the event ofa route being canceled for a1 approaching
CBTC train (i.e., the movement authority is pulled back short of the interlocking and is in effect). 皿
this case, if the train is greater than
safe
braking distance from the entrance to the
interlocking (as
determined by the safe braking modelof 6.1.2.1) or the train stops
to
entering the interlocking;
the route shall be released without running further time_
b)
Iraffic locking
be overridden So that
CBTC-equipped trains may move in opposing directions
within their respective movement authorities on the same track at the same time。
Wayside signals and their aspects may be provided as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.A
CBTC system may override the conventional aspects to cause the signal(s) to display CBTC aspect(s)
only to CBTC-equipped trains
33
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
applied 
again
applied
Prior
may

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6.1.11.2 Responses to CBTC train location failures
In the event ofa failure ofthe CBTC train location determination function, route
locking shallremain in effect
until the train is proven to be clear of the interlocking by the CBTC system (i.e., the train is subsequently
determined to be clear Of the interlocking limits ), or through operating procedures, Or a combination Of both
approaches。
I the event Of a failure Of the CBTC train location determination function 边 an
interlocking where train
location is also capable of being detected by means Of a secondary system CBTC system overrides of the
interlocking functions may be released, provided route and other locking functions are maintained by
separate interlocking system so as to prevent the movement ofa switch in front ofand under the train until the
train is Proven to be clear ofthe
interlocking:
6.1.11.3 Response to loss of switch indication
In the event ofa loss ofswitch idication once a movement
authority has been issued across a switch, a CBTC
system shallpull back the movement authority to a
 prior to the switch。
6.1.12 Travel direction reversal interlocks
Travel direction reversal interlocks Shall be
required ATP function for any CBTC system application
requiring bidirectional operations, in order to support reversal of train direction at terminal stations and to
support intermediate turn backs and shuttle modes of operation, for example
Itshallnotbe possible to extend the movementauthority for a train into a section oftrack for which an opposing
authorized travel direction has already been established。
A reversal Of authorized travel direction within
section Of track shall not be possible unless both Of the
following
are true:
Alltrains within that section oftrack are at zerO
and constrained against motion in the original
authorized travel direction。
b)
The movement authorities for all trains outside of that section of track do not extend into the section
and are constrained from
being extended into the section in the original authorized travel direction。
6.1.13 Workzone protection
ACBTC system shallnot grant movement authorities to trains to operate into out-of-service (blocked) tracks
OI
through switches blocked in other than the required position and shallenforce restricted speeds on approach
to and through defined work zones (see 6.3.6.4). A CBTC system may also include capabilities to preclude
ATO mode ofoperation through a work zone_
6.1.14
Broken rail detection
Where
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system may interface to an external system for
purposes Ofbroken rail detection. ACBTC system s reaction to a detected broken rail shall be as specified by
the
authority havingjurisdiction。
6.1.15 Highway grade-crossing warning
Where highway crossings at grade exist within the limits OfCBTCterritory and where specified by the authority
havingjurisdiction, a CBTC system may interface to grade-crossing warning devices to permit controlofsuch
devices based on CBTC location reports and to coordinate movement authorities through the crossing based
34
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _
Point
Sspeed

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
On the status from such devices.
Specific requirements shalladhere to local
crossing standards and shall
be further defined by the authority having jurisdiction and may include any Of the following:
Constant
and consistent) warning times, independent oftrain speed or accelerationldeceleration
b)
For trains making station stops prior to crossings, delayed activation Of the warning devices until the
train is ready to depart the station
An external subsystem providing status Of
crossing may modify CBTC operation, such
35
movement authority limit
When a train clears
crossing i multiple track areas, continued activation Of the warning devices 迕
the CBTC system predicts a second train will reactivate the devices within a predefined time interval
Advance warning for priority control of highway traffic signals or other highway signage, (e.8:, as
described in IEEE Std 1570-2002)
6.1.16 Restricted route protections
Where specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall include capabilities to prevent a
train from
entering_
a route that is unsafe for movement of that type oftrain due to mechanical, civil, electrical,
Or other
predefined temporary Or permanent conditions Of the train Or route, Or through interfaces to intrusion
detection devices, platform edge doors
where fitted), andlor other devices capable of detecting hazards that
impact route integrity。
6.2
ATO functions
For operation oftrains without crews, a CBTC system shall, as a minimul, be capable Of providing allofthe
ATO functions as defined in this sub clause, to automatically operate trains i accordance with prescribed
operating criteria within the safety constraints imposed by ATP。
For operation of train with crews, the required ATO functions shall be as specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
The CBTC wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data communications interface shallbe sufficient to support
a11
required ATO functions_
6.2.1
Automatic speed regulation
The
starting; stopping; and speed regulation Of the train as it travels
the track shall be automatically
controlled by a CBTC system so that the speed , acceleration, deceleration, and jerk rates are within specified
passenger comfort limits (as defined by the authority having jurisdiction) and the train
Is below the
overspeed limits imposed by ATR。
Station stopping accuracy shall be as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
ACBTC system may support multiple ATO speeds, acceleration, and service brake rates i accordance with
the train operator (ifpresent) or ATS inputs。
6.2.2
Platform berthing control
ACBTC system shallbe capable of implementing any Of the following platform berthing control modes=
Where the platform length is approximately equal to the train length。
CBTC system shall allow
train to enter a station platform only if there is sufficient room to fully berth or if the preceding train
has
movement authority that shallallow it to fully leave the platform area and it has begun to move
out of the station (i.e., within ATP constraints, train movement shall be controlled to minimize the
likelihood ofthe train coming to a stop when only partially within the station platform limits).
35
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
grade
grade
along
speed

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6)
Where the
platform length is longer than the train length,
CBTC system shall support multiple
stopping positions within the platform area, as defined by the authority having jurisdiction。
Where the platform length supports multiple train berthings, a CBTC system shall allow
train to
enter a
platform while another train already occupies an alternative berth。
Where the platform length is shorter than the train length, a CBTC system shall support platform
berthings consistent with the door opening control protection interlocks Of 6.1.8.
6.2.3 Door control
CBTC system shall be capable Of automatically controlling train doors (and platform edge doors, where
fitted) during passenger boarding and discharging:
As defined by the authority having jurisdiction, automatic door control may be fully automatic (both open and
close) or
be limited to the following:
Automatic door opening only
with Or without Passenger door open requests)
b)
Automatic door
closing only
Neither automatic door opening nor closing
Ifautomatic platform edge doors are provided,
Shall be controlled as a set with the
matching train doors
Such that the train and
matching platform edge doors open and close together. It shallbe possible to manually
disable the operation Of any door set (both the train and the matching platform edge door ) without affecting
the automatic operation Of other door sets. If a train door is disabled, the corresponding platform edge door
shallnot open. Ifa
platform edge door is disabled, the corresponding train door shallnot open. The amount Of
time the train is to remain in the station with doors open may be established by ATS (6.3.5.1) and automatically
controlled by ATO.
6.2.4 Standby mode and Sleep mode
6.2.4.1 Standby mode
If required by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall be capable to send
a command to the
train to turn offnon-essential systems as specified by authority having jurisdiction。
For a train in standby mode: A CBTC system shall be capable to send a command to the train to turn on non-
essentialsystems。
6.2.4.2 Sleep mode
Ifrequired by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall be capable to turn Off (or partially tumn
0ff) the train-borne CBTC equipment and of
waking Up when commanded。
6.2.5 Train Wash
Ifrequired by the authority havingjurisdiction, a CBTC system shall support train
functions aS
specified
by authority having jurisdiction such as lower speed and accurate stopping:
6.2.6
Reduced Performance Due to Environmental Factors
Ifrequired by the authority havingjurisdiction, a CBTC system shallsupport reduced braking andacceleration
rates to compensate for non-optimal adhesion due to environmental conditions_
36
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
may
they
Wash

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6.2.7
Jogging
Ifrequired by the authority having jurisdiction, CBTC trains shall have provisions to reverse train movement
t0
re-position in order to align with the stopping
These events shall be alarmed and logged i ATS or as
specified by authority havingjurisdiction。
6.2.8
Automatic Coupling and Uncoupling
Ifrequired by the authority having jurisdiction, provisions shall be made to command a train to automatically
with
stationary train. Coupling
and operational conditions shall be as defined by authority
having jurisdiction。
Provisions shall also
be made
to command
8 train
t0
automatically uncouple。
The
uncoupling point shall be as commanded by ATS. Uncoupling operational conditions shall be as defined by
authority having jurisdiction. For coupling and uncoupling, train length and integrity shallbe in accordance
with 6.1.6.
6.3 ATS functions
If specifed by the authority having jurisdiction,
CBTC system may interface to, or be integrated with;
a ATS system. Under such circumstances, and to the extent specified by the authority having jurisdiction,
CBTC- related ATS functions shall be implemented as defined in this sub clause i order to benefit
tle
characteristics Ofa CBTC system as defined in 4.1, namely, the availability ofthe
following:
Train location information to a high precision, independent oftrack circuits
b)
Continuous wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data communications link
Train-bornc and
wayside data processing capabilities
The CBTC-related ATS functions defined in this sub clause shall be fully integrated with other conventional
ATS functions and other IOn-ATS functions, as may be specified by the authority having jurisdiction, to
support overallservice management for the transit system and provide for a single consistent user interface.
The CBTC data
communications network; inclusive Of the wayside-to-train
and train-to-wayside data
communications interface, shall be sufficient to support those CBTC-related ATS functions specified by the
authority havingjurisdiction。
6.3.1
ATS user interface
Each ATS user interface shall display all information and implement all control actions, as defined in 6.3,
within acceptable latencies as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
Mandatory display data and user information inputs shall be in accordance with IEEE Std 1474.2-2025. The
ATS user shallbe able to override any automated CBTC-related ATS functions defined in 6.3.
Certain ATS functions (such as stopping a train en route and the application and removalof temporary
restrictions, switchltrack blocking, Or work zones) can potentially introduce system hazards and the specific
implementation of these functions shall be considered in the hazard analyses required by 5.3.2.ATS functions
are notrequired to be implemented in a fail-safe manner; however, the hazard analyses shall take into account;
aS 3 Iinimum, thC
probability ofthe following:
Safety-related commands not being executed when initiated by anATS user;
b)
The CBTC system prematurely removing safety-related commands initiated by an ATS user;
The CBTC system executing safety-related commands that were not initiated by an ATS user;
Incorrect information being displayed by the CBTC system to the ATS user:
37
Copyright@ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
Point。
couple
speed
fron
speed

IEEE Std 1474.
TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
The hazard analyses shall give due consideration of the specific transit
application and whether the trains are
operated with or without crews_
Control action confirmation (e.8., separate acknowledgment) shall be provided for any safety-related user
interfaceslinputs and functions whose inadvertent implementation could have an adverse operational impact
removalof work zones, removalofspeed restrictions), as defined by the authority having jurisdiction。
Control
action
Comands
Iay
be implemented 边
a Closed
manner that
requires
request and
acknowledgment between ATS and CBTC system_
6.3.2
CBTCtrain identification and train tracking
Each CBTC-equipped train operating within CBTC territory shall be assigned a train identification. This train
identification shallindicate the type oftrain and other pertinent information about the train。
An ATS system shall have the capability to automatically track, maintain records Of, and display on the ATS
user interface the locations, identities, train schedule, and other pertinent data for all CBTC-equipped trains
operating i the CBTC territory. The front and rear position of trains shall be tracked based on CBTC train
location reports, and the train location shall be displayed on the ATS user interface. Variations in train length
may be displayed either proportionally or as a standard-length icon supplemented by textualtrain length data。
The ATS systems may also have provisions to display non-CBTC or non-communicating trains_
6.3.3 Train routing
An ATS system shall have the capability to permit CBTC-equipped trains operating in CBTC territory to be
manually and automatically routed based on CBTC train location reports and 证 accordance with the train
service data, predefined routing rules, and any ATS user-directed service strategy. Where applicable to the
Specific track configuration, automatic routing shall facilitate the proper merging and diverging Of trains
at junctions; turn back Of trains, the movement Of trains fromlto storage areas, and the rerouting Of trains
讧 response to service disruptions andlor planned outages. Train routes shall be indicated on the ATS user
iterface and may also be indicated to the train operator and/or conductor; 让 present, on their displays, as
specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
AnATS system
also include a means to control and limit movement authorities Of CBTC-equipped trains
operating in CBTC territory. CBTC movement authority limits shallbe capable ofbeing displayed on the ATS
user interface, and any uncommanded reductions of authority limits shall be alarmed。
For trains operated with crews, movement authority limits may also be indicated to the train operator andlor
conductor on their displays, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
6.3.4
Automatic train regulation
6.3.4.1 Schedulelheadway regulation
An ATS system may have the capability to automatically monitor and regulate the performance Of CBTC-
equipped trains operating in CBTC territory, in relation to schedule andlor headway adherence。
An ATS system may include an automatic dispatching function (based on train identities, schedules, CBTC
train location reports, scheduled and actual headways between trains, and service strategies implemented by
authorized ATS uSeIS
Schedule and headway regulation for CBTC-equipped trains shall be by means Of dwell time variance
(including train holds) and may also be by controlofrun times between stations (e.8., through adjustments to
train acceleration and service brake rates, and speeds), as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. For
trains operated with crews, the desired station departure time, dwell time, and desired speed profile between
38
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
(e.8
Ioop
Iay

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
EEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
stations may be indicated to the train operator and/or conductor on their
displays, and, when operating iATO
mode, shall be implemented automatically by a CBTC system using the automatic speed regulation function
Of 6.2.1 and may include dwelltime adjustment。
AnATS system may provide the capability to adjust the train service braking profiles and tractive effort for
CBTC-equipped trains (e.8., in response to climatic (e.8., wet rail conditions).ACBTC system shall coordinate
implementation Of requested changes in service braking profiles to avoid conditions that would result i a
emergency brake application。
6.3.4.2 Junction management
An ATS system may include automatic train
regulation functions, based on CBTC train location reports, to
facilitate appropriate train meets (such as transfers between local and express tracks, and at the merge point
between different lines) in order to optimize overall system operational performance.
6.3.4.3 Energy optimization
An ATS system may have the capability to implement energy optimization algorithms for CBTC-equipped
trains through the real-time control and coordination of train acceleration, train coasting, and train braking:
The priority given to energy optimization versus schedulelheadway regulation shall be as specified by the
authority havingjurisdiction.
6.3.5 Station stop functions
6.3.5.1
Stop train at next station
AnATS system may include the means to direct a single CBTC-equipped train or a group OfCBTC-equipped
trains to Stop at the next station, even ifthe train is scheduled to bypass that station. For trains operated with
crews, a CBTC system may indicate the ATS train stop information to the train operator and conductor on their
displays. In ATO mode, a CBTC-equipped train shall automatically stop at the next station.
6.3.5.2 Hold train at station
For trains operated without crews, an ATS systen shall include facilities to hold (and subsequently release) a
CBTC-equipped train at 3 station。
For trains operated with crews, this function is optional and shall be as specified by the authority having
jurisdiction. If this function is provided, a CBTC system may indicate the train hold information to the train
operator and conductor on their displays, andlor prevent a CBTC-equipped train from departing the station i
ATO mode。
6.3.5.3 Skip station stop
AnATS system may include facilities to direct a CBTC-equipped train Or group Of CBTC-equipped trains to
pass through a station Or group of stations without stopping: For trains operated with crews, a CBTC system
may indicate the skip station information to the train operator and conductor on their displays. In ATO mode,
the train shall automatically skip the designated stations at a
not
exceeding
as defined by authority
havingjurisdiction. Skip station stop command may inhibit automatic door opening if train happens to stop at
Platform
Per movement authority).
6.3.5.4 Door control inhibit
AnATS system may include facilities to inhibit (and subsequently permit) CBTC controlofthe train doors, "
accordance with 6.2.3
39
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
speed 二
speed
(e.8;

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6.3.6 Restricting train operations
The
application and removalof the following restrictive functions can potentially introduce system hazards
and the specific implementation Of these functions shall be i accordance with 6.3.2 and considered i the
hazard analyses required by 5.3.2. Stacked (multiple) safety related or restrictive commands shall be removed
onC at a time i accordance with 6.3.2 So that no unintended
permissive state is allowed。
6.3.6.1
Stopping atrain enroute
AnATS system shallprovide a means to stop a single CBTC-equipped train or group OfCBTC-equipped trains
immediately.ACBTC system shallinitiate an immediate brake application on the designated trains and notify
the train operator and conductor; i present, via their displays. Removal of the ATS initiated stop command
may be accomplished on a train by train basis for all CBTC-equipped trains_
6.3.6.2 Temporary speed restrictions
An ATS system shall include facilities to impose (and remove) temporary speed restrictions for CBTC-
equipped trains operating On any section oftrack in CBTC territory (see 6.1.3).
6.3.6.3 Switchltrack blocking
An ATS system shall include facilities to block
and subsequently unblock) a switch。
controlled signal, a
route
point, or a section Of track within CBTC territory. A CBTC system shall prohibit CBTC-equipped
trains from receiving movement authorities over blocked switches not aligned in the required position or into
routes andlor sections oftrack that have been blocked (see 6.1.2 and 6.1.3 )_
6.3.6.4 Workzones
An ATS system shall include facilities to establish
and subsequently remove) temporary work zones for the
protection Of work crews and work trains
ACBTC system shallenforce restricted speeds on approach to and through defined work zones
see 6.1.13).A
CBTC systems may also enforce restricted
on adjacent track through defined work zone as determined
by authority having jurisdiction。
A CBTC system may also enforce
stop prior to entering work zone. For
trains operated with crews, information indicating that the restriction is due to a work zone shall be displayed
tO the train operator and conductor on their
displays, and the CBTC system may preclude ATO mode Of
operation through a work zone.
I the authority
having jurisdiction allows roadway workers
train operations, the ATSICBTC system
may provide methods of visually and audibly idicating the approach oftrains
the
wayside tO warn OD-
track roadway workers。
6.3.6.5 Climatic conditions
Ifa Climatic condition is a function ofthe service brake calculations, removalofsuch restriction shall be done
- accordance with 6.3.2.
6.3.7 Passengerinformation system interfaces
An ATS system may iterface with
wayside andlor train-bome passenger information systems to trigger
automatic passenger information messages, such as train arrival information, based on CBTC train location
reports. Train-borne passengerinformation systeminterfaces shallbe in accordance with IEE Std 1477-1998.
40
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
entry
speed
during
along一

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6.3.8 Fault reporting and logs
6.3.8.1
CBTC fault reporting
Failures and out-of-tolerance conditions detected by, or input to,
CBTC system that can impact the On-
time performance Of the transit system Or result i some other loss Of specific CBTC functionality may be
automatically indicated on the ATS user interface display.
alarms shall be categorized and prioritized into
criticaland noncriticalalarms and logged.Allcriticalalarms, as defined by authority having jurisdiction shall
require acknowledgment。
6.3.8.2 Train fault reporting
Train-borne
CBTC equipment may include interfaces
t0
train-borne  subsystems
for
the Purposes
Of
communicating train health data to the wayside for display on the ATS user interface displays, as specified by
te authority havingjurisdiction。
6.3.8.3 CBTC data logging
CBTC system shall log all communication between all CBTC sub systems in all modes ofoperation and store
i accordance with requirements as defned by authority havingjurisdiction。
CBTC logged data shall be available for playback analysis and incident investigation and to aid 边 trouble
shooting: This data may also be available for external data analysis by 3rd party tools_
6.4 Interoperability interface requirements
This performance and functional requirements standard does not include interface design standards for
interoperability: Where interoperability requirements are specified by the authority havingjurisdiction, it shall
be the responsibility of that authority to define the required interoperability interface standards_
NOTE
Examples of interoperability requirements include the following:
Trains equipped with CBTC equipment firnished by one supplier to be capable of operating in CBTC territory
equipped with wayside CBTC equipment furnished by another supplier
b)
Wayside equipment furnished by two separate suppliers to communicate with each other in the overlap area and
with common centralATS
equipment
A basic operating unit with train-borne CBTC equipment furnished by one supplier to be capable of operating
Within a train with another basic
operating unit equipped with train-borne CBTC equipment furnished by another
supplier
future CBTC standard may establish interoperability interface requirements。
41
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
Any

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
AnnexA
(informative)
Bibliography
Bibliographical references are resources that provide additional or helpful material but do not need to be
understood or used to implement this standard. Reference to these resources is made for informational use
only。
[81] AREMA Communications & Signals Manualof Recommended Practices。
[82]
IEEE Std 1698TM-2009, IEE Guide for the Calculation of Braking Distances for Rail Transit Vehicles。
AREMA publications are available from the American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-OfWay Association, 8201 Corporate
Drive, Suite 1125 , Landover, MD 20785-2230 USA
WWW.arema.Org
42
Copyright@ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Annex B
(informative)
Example functional block diagram for atypical CBTC system
Figure B.1 illustrates the functional elements within CBTC ATP,ATO, ATS categories
ATP Functions (6.1)
Train LocationlTrain Speed
End-Of Track Protection
Platform Interlocks
Work Zone Protection
Determination
6.1.
6.1.5
6.1.9
6.1.13
Parted Train Protection and
Safe Train Separation
Coupling and Uncoupling
Emergency Braking
Broken Rail Detection
Of Trains
6.1,2
6.1.6
6.1.10
6.1.14
Overspeed Protection and
Highway Grade-Crossing
Zero Speed Detection
Route Interlocking
Brake Assurance
Warning
6.1.3
6.1.15
Traffic Direction
Restricted Route
Rollback Protection
Train Door Protection
Reversal interlocks
Protections
6.1.4
6.1.8
6.1.12
6.1.16
ATO Functions (6.2)
ATS Functions (6.3)
Automatic Speed
Train Wash
ATS User Interface
Station Stop Functions
Regulation
6,2.5
6,3.
3,5
Reduced Performance Due
CBTC Train Identification
Restricting Train
Platform Berthing Control
to Environmental Factors
Train
Tracking
Operations
6.2.2
6.2.6
6.3.2
3.6
Passenger Information
Door Control
Jogging
Train Routing
System Interfaces
6.2.3
6.3.3
Standby Mode and
Automatic Coupling and
Automatic Train
Sleep Mode
Uncoupling
Regulation
Fault Reporting and Logs
6.2.4
6.2.8
6.3.4
6.3.8
Figure 8.1一Example functional block diagram fora typical CBTC system
43
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
and

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Annex C
(informative)
Typical CBTC parameters
Table C.1 provides typical ranges for certain CBTC parameters for general guidance only. Parameter values
for a
specific application andlor a specific CBTC system design should be established by the authority having
jurisdiction andlor the supplier, with due consideration ofallrelevant factors for the specific application。
Table C.1-Typical CBTC parameters
Parameter
Typical range
Minimuln
number Of trains tat Can
be processed by
single wayside
10 trains
controller
Resolution ofmeasured train location (i.e.,as reported to establish movement
二 =
6.251 (20f)
authority limits for a following train for ATP purposes 二
Accuracy
0f
measured
train
location
during
Iormal
(non-degraded)
士 IOI to 士601
operations (i.e., maximull error in reported train location for ATP purposes)
(士33 廿t04197f)
Stopping accuracy Of programmed station stop (ATO) purposes
without
30 cm - 100 cm
platform edge doors
(士12-39皿)
Resolution oftrain movement authority limnits
士0.25 m to士6.25I
(士10in to 士20f)
Resolution oftrain speed measurement for ATP purposes
士0.5 kmh to 士2 kmh
(士0.3 milh to 士1.25 milh)
Accuracy oftrain speed measurement for ATP purposes
士0.8 klnlh (0.5 milh) + 3%
ofmeasured speeds
Resolution oftrain speed commands
Civil
limits)
士0.5 kmlh to+5 kmlh
(士0.3 milh to 士3 milh)
Train-to-wayside message communication delays
0.5 s to 2 s (nominal)
Wayside-to-train message communication delays
0.5 s to 2 s (nominal)
Wayside CBTC equipment reaction times
0.078 to 1 s (nominal)
Train-borne CBTC equipment reaction times
0.07 s to 0.75 s (nomninal)
Rollback detection criteria
<二1.0m t0 2.01
(<3.3 fto 6.6f)
Zero speed detection criteria
<0.5 knlh for < = 1s
(<0.3 milh)
Maintenance tolerance for field objects
0.051 to 1.221
(2jto 48证)
44
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
(e.8,
speed

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Annex D
(informative)
Typical safe braking model
0.1
Introduction
typicalsafe braking model for CBTC systems is illustrated in Figure D.1.
See IEEE1698-2009 for additional information. [82]
It should be noted that Figure D.1 is not drawn to scale but is
simplistic representation to assist i the
understanding Of a typical CBTC safe braking model. It should also be noted that the safe braking model
outlined here is defined for level tangent track and would need to be adjusted for grades. The safe braking
parameters may be different depending on covered versus uncovered track.
皿 Figure D.1,
the emergency brake curve is the worst-case; open-looP; speedldistance curve
8 train Will
follow once the ATP has initiated an emergency brake application. This emergency brake curve is always less
than Or equal to the safe
Curve, Where safe
is defined as the
above Which a critical hazard
(derailment or collision) could OcCUI:
In this model, safety factors are accounted for in the emergency brake curve, train position uncertainties, and
other additional measurement tolerances incorporated in the CBTC system design, and there is no requirement
to add additional safety margins。
The ATP overspeed detection curve is the speed-distance curve that the ATP subsystem uses to immediately
initiate an emergency brake application, 让 the ATP subsystem detects that the measured
exceeds this
Curve at thC measured train Iocation_
When the ATP subsystem has initiated an emergency brake application,
the ATP subsystem is no longer i the control loop, and the train will emergency brake at Or below the
emergency brake curve_
The emergency brake curve includes an iitial propulsion runaway period, until
propulsion is disabled.
The ATP profile curve is the speed-distance curve that is an ATP overspeed allowance below the ATP over-
detection curve. The ATP profile is the base curve used by the ATP subsystem_
0.2
Train-borne CBTC response time (A)
In Figure D.1,it is assumed that the CBTC system will measure the train speed and train location (relative to
is movement authority limit) and compare the measured
with the ATP profile speed at that measured
location, every A seconds
WOISt case)
In Figure D.1, point X represents the situation where the CBTC measured speed is just below the ATP over-
detection curve at the ATP measured location, i.e., although the ATP measured speed is above the ATP
profile, it is still within the ATP overspeed allowance. As such, the CBTC system willnot initiate emergency
braking:
However, because Of worst-case speed and location measurement errors (position uncertainty ), it is possible
that the actual speed and actual location of the train could be a point Y。
At this
i time, although the train operator andlor ATO subsystem would normally be attempting to
the train speed down to the ATP profile speed, it is assumed that a failure occurs that results in the train
accelerating rather than braking:
45
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
Speed
Speed
speed
speed
speed
speed
Speed
point
bring

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
seconds later; this situation will be detected by the CBTC system (point 乙 in Figure D.1), as the CBTC
measured speed willnow clearly be in excess ofthe ATP overspeed detection curve, and the CBTC system will
immediately initiate an open-loop emergency brake application。
The speed at
乙 therefore represents the maximum
that a train can achieve above the ATP profile
due to CBTC system s worst-case response times and measurement errors_
Atthis point, theremaining contributions to the safe braking modelare determined by the vehicle characteristics
only.
0.3 Propulsion disable response time (B)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled B in Figure D.1 ), the train continues to accelerate
until the train
propulsion system has been disabled in response to the CBTC system initiating an emergency
brake application。
0.4 Coasttime (C)
During this component ofthe safe braking model (labeled C in Figure D.1), the train is assumed to be coasting
at thc maximum
speed achieved as
a Iesult Of the train
accelerating
t0
propulsion being disabled. This
componentofthe safe braking modelends when emergency braking begins to take effect。
0.5 Emergency brake build-up time (D)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled D in Figure D.1 ), the emergency brake rate will
build Up from zero to at least the GEBR.
0.6 Emergency braking at GEBR (E)
During this component ofthe safe braking model (labeled E in Figure D.1 ), the train continues to decelerate at
the GEBR until the train comes to zero speed.
NOTE
The components D and E may be integrated
an equivalent single brake curve
0.7
Position uncertainty
The safe braking model shall include the maximum distance due to measurement inaccuracy by the CBTC
system for both the leading and following train。
46
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _
Point
speed
Prior
ito

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Emergency Brake
Curye
ATP Overspeed
Point Z: Emergency
Detection Curve
Braking Initiated
Point Y: Actual
by ATP
Movement Authority
speedllocation at
Limit
start of propulsion
runaway
Speed Measurement Elror
ATP Overspeed Allowance
鲁
Point X:
Jnositionty
Speedllocation;
ATP Profile
as determined by
carborne ATP
Position
Uncertainty
Trainborne ATP Reaction Time
B
Time to Disable Propulsion after EB
Initiated
C.
Additional Time to Apply EB
D
Emergency Brake Build-up Time
E
Emergency Braking at GEBR
DISTANCE (related to Safe Braking Model times)
Figure D.1-Typical safe braking model
47
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Annex E
(normative)
System Safety and Security Program requirements
System Safety Program Plan may be superseded based on requirement established by regulatory bodies Or
authority having jurisdiction。
In addition to SSPP; the
authority having jurisdiction may also implement a Systems Security Program that
icludes a Threat and
Vulnerability Assessment (TVA)。
E.1
System Safety Program Plan (SSPP)
E.1.1 Purpose
The SSPP shall describe; i detail, tasks and activities Of system safety management and system safety
engineering required to identify, evaluate, and eliminatelcontrol hazards or reduce the associated risk to alevel
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction throughout the system life
E.1.2 Description
An SSPP shall be developed to provide a basis ofunderstanding as to how the System Safety Program will be
accomplished to meet safety requirements_
The approved plan shall, on an item-by-item basis, account for all
required tasks and responsibilities. The SSPP shallinclude the following elements。
E.1.2.1 Program scopeand objectives
Each SSPP shalldescribe, as a minimum, the five elements ofan effective System Safety Program: defnitionof
the safety tasks, a planned approach for task accomplishment, qualified people to accomplish tasks, authority
to implement tasks through all levels ofmanagement, and appropriate commitment ofresources (both
staffing
and
funding) to assure tasks are completed. The SSPP shall define
program to satisfy the system safety
requirements
This section shall cover the
following:
Describe the scope of the overallprogram and the related System Safety Program
b)
List
the
tasks
and
activities
Of system safety  management
and   engineering;
describe
the
interrelationships between system safety and other functional elements Of the program; list the other
program requirements and tasks applicable to
safety and identify where
arC
specified or
described_
Account for all contractually required safety tasks and responsibilities。
A matrix shall be provided to
correlate requirements to the location in the SSPP where the requirementis addressed。
E.1.2.2 System safety organization
The SSPP shall describe the
following:
The system safety organization Or function within the organization Of the total program using charts
to Show the
organizationaland functional relationships and lines of communication. It shallalso show
the
organizational relationship between other functional elements having responsibility for tasks
with system safety impacts and the system safety management and engineering organization. It shall
identify the review and approval authority Of applicable tasks by system safety。
48
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
cycle。
system
they

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
6)
The responsibility and authority Of system safety personnel, other contractor organizational elements
involved in the system safety effort, subcontractors, and system safety groups_
It shall identify the
methods by which safety personnel
raise issues Of concern directly to the program manager Or
the program manager'$ supervisor within the corporation, the organizational unit responsible for
executing each task, and the authority in regard to resolution ofall identified hazards_
The staffing Of the system safety organization for the duration Of the contract to include manpower
loading; control of resources, and
summary Of the qualifications Of
system safety personnel
assigned to the effort。
icluding those who possess coordinationlapproval authority for contractor
prepared documentation。
The procedures by Which the contractor will integrate and coordinate the system safety efforts,
including assignment Of the system safety requirements to action organizations and subcontractors
coordination Of subcontractor System Safety Programs, integration of hazard analyses, program and
design reviews, program status reporting, and system safety groups_
The Process through Which contractor management decisions
will be made; including timely
notification Of unacceptable risks, necessary action; incidents or malfunctions, waivers to safety
requirements; program deviations, etc.
Details Of how resolution and action relative to system safety
will
be effected
at the Program
management level possessing resolution authority。
E.1.2.3 System Safety Program milestones
The SSPP milestones shallinclude the following:
Define System Safety Program milestones. It shall relate these to major program milestones, program
elementresponsibility, and required inputs and outputs。
b)
Provide a program schedule of safety tasks, including start and completion dates, reports, and reviews。
Identity subsystem, component, and software safety activities as
well as integrated system level
activities (i.e., design analyses, tests, and demonstrations) applicable to the System Safety Program;
but
specified in other engineering studies and development efforts to preclude duplication。
Provide the estimated manpower
loadingrequired to complete each task.
E.1.2.4 General system safety requirements and criteria
The SSPP shall describe the following:
General engineering requirements and design criteria for safety. It shall include safety requirements
for support equipment and operational safety requirements for allappropriate phases ofthe life
UP
and including; disposal. It shall list the safety standards and system specifications containing
safety requirements that shall be complied with, and iclude titles, dates, and where applicable;
paragraph numbers。
b)
Risk assessment procedures.
I shall include the hazard severity categories;
hazard probability
levels, and the system safety precedence that shall be followed to satisfy the safety requirements
Of the program. It shall state any qualitative Or quantitative measures Of safety to be used for risk
asSessment,
icluding a description Of the acceptablelunacceptable risk levels, and include system
safety definitions that modify, deviate from, or are in addition to those in this standard。
Closed-loop procedures for taking action to resolve identified unacceptable risk, including those
involving non-developmentalitems。
49
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
may
key
cycle
t0,

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
E.1.2.5 Hazard analysis
The SSPP shall describe the
following:
The analysis techniques and formats to be used i qualitative Or quantitative analysis to identify
hazards, their causes and effects, hazard elimination, Or risk reduction requirements and how those
requirements are met。
b)
The depth within the system to
Which each technique is used, including hazard identification
associated with the system, subsystem, components, software, data, hazardous materials, personnel
ground support equipment, non-developmental itens, facilities and their interrelationship in logistic
support, training, maintenance, operational, and disposal (including render safe and
emergency
disposal) environments。
The integration ofsubcontractor hazard analyses with overall system hazard analyses。
Efforts to identify and control hazards associated with materials used during the system 's life
E.1.2.6 System safety data
The SSPP safety data shallinclude the following:
Describe the approach for collecting and processing pertinent historical hazard data, mishap data, and
safety lessons-learned data_
b)
Identify deliverable data by title and number, and means Of delivery (e.8 , hard copy, electronically).
Identify non-deliverable system safety data and describe the procedures for accessibility by the
authority havingjurisdiction and retention Of data ofhistorical value.
E.1.2.7 Safety verification
The SSPP shall describe the following:
The verification (test, analysis, inspection, etc. ) requirements for ensuring that safety is adequately
demonstrated. It shall identify any certification requirements for software; safety devices, Or other
special safety features (e.8., render safe and emergency disposal procedures).
b)
Procedures for
making sure safety-related verification information is transmitted to the authority
havingjurisdiction for review and analysis。
Procedure for ensuring the safe conduct ofalltests_
E.1.2.8
Audit program
The SSPP shall describe the techniques and procedures to be employed to make sure the objectives and
requirements ofthe System Safety Program are being accomplished。
E.1.2.9 Training
The SSPP shall describe the safety training for engineering, technician operating, and maintenance personnel。
E.1.2.10 Incident reporting
The contractor shalldescribe in the SSPP the mishaplincident alertinglnotification, investigation, andreporting
PrOCCSS,
icluding notification of the authority having jurisdiction。
50
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
cycle。

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
E.1.2.11 System safety interfaces
The SSPP shallidentify, in detail, the following:
The interface between system safety, systems engineering; and all other support disciplines, such
35
maintainability, quality control, reliability, software development, human factors engineering;
medical support (health hazard assessments ), and any others
Ihe interface between system safety and allsystem integration and test disciplines
E.2 Preliminary hazard analysis (PHA)
E2.1 Purpose
The PHA shall identify safety-critical areas, provide an initial assessment Of hazards, and identify requisite
hazard controls and follow-on actions。
E.2.2 Description
APHA shall be performed and documented to obtain an initial risk assessment Of a concept or system. Based
On the best available data,
icluding mishap data (i assessable) from similar systems and other les- sons
learned, hazards associated with the proposed design or function shall be evaluated for hazard severity, hazard
probability, and operational constraint
Safety provisions and alternatives needed to eliminate hazards Or
reduce their associated risk to
level acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction shall be included. The
PHA shall consider the following for identification and evaluation ofhazards, as a minimum:
Hazardous components
fuels, propellants, lasers; toxic substances; hazardous construction
materials, pressure systems, and other energy sources).
b)
Safety-related   interface
considerations
among
various
elements
Of the system (e.8.,
material
compatibilities, electromagnetic interference, inadvertent activation, firelexplosive initiation and
propagation, and hardware and software controls ). This shall include consideration Of the potential
contribution by software (including software developed by other contractorslsources) to subsystem/
system mishaps. Safety design criteria to control safety-critical software commands and responses
(e.8.
iadvertent command, failure to command
untimely command
OI respOnsCS,
inappropriate
magnitude, or other designated undesired events)
shall be identified and
appropriate action taken to
icorporate them i the software
and related hardware) specifications。
Environmental constraints, including the operating environments (e.8:,
shock。
vibration_
extreme temperatures, noise, exposure to toxic substances, health hazards, fire, electrostatic discharge,
lightning, electromagnetic environmental effects).
Operating; test, maintenance, built-in-tests, diagnostics, and emergency procedures (e.8.二
human
factors engineering; human error analysis of operator functions, tasks, and requirements; effect of
factors, such
35
equipment layout, lighting requirements, potential exposures to toxic materials;
effects Ofnoise or radiation on human performance)。
Those test-unique hazards that will be a direct
result ofthe test and evaluation ofthe article Or vehicle.
Facilities, realproperty installed equipment, supportequipment (e.8. , provisions for storage, assembly;
checkout, proofltesting ofhazardous systemslassemblies thatmayinvolve toxic, fammable, explosive,
corrosive, Or
cryogenic materials/wastes; radiation or noise emitters; electrical power sources), and
training (e.8., training and certification pertaining to safety operations and maintenance)-
Safety-related equipment, safeguards, and possible alternate approaches
interlocks; system
redundancy; fail-safe design considerations
hardware
OI
software   controls; subsystem
protection; fire detection andsuppression systems; personalprotective equipment; heating; ventilation,
and air-conditioning; and noise or radiation barriers).
51
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
(e.8,
drop;
(e.8,
using

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
g
Malfunctions to the system , subsystems, Or software. Each malfunction shall be specified, the causing
and resulting sequence Of events determined, the degree Of hazard determined, and appropriate
specification and /or design changes developed。
E.3 Subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA)
E.3.1 Purpose
The subsystem
hazard analysis (SSHA
shall verify subsystem
compliance
with safety requirements
contained in subsystem specifications and
other applicable documents; identify previously unidentified
hazards associated with the design Of subsystems, including component failure modes; critical human error
iputs, and hazards resulting from functional relationships between components and equipment comprising
each subsystem; recommend actions necessary to eliminate identified hazards Or control their associated risk
t0
acceptable levels:
E.3.2 Description
An SSHA shall be performed and documented to identify allcomponents and equipment that could result in a
hazard or whose design does not satisfy safety requirements. Areas to consider are performance, performance
degradation, functional failures,
errors, design errors Or
defects, orinadvertent functioning: The human
shall be considered a component within a subsystem, receiving both inputs and initiating outputs, during the
conduct ofthis analysis。
The analysis shallinclude a determination of the following:
The modes Of failure。
icluding reasonable human errors as well as single-point and common- mode
failures, and the effects on safety when failures occur in subsystem components。
b)
Potential contribution
Of hardware
and
software (including that
Which is developed by other
contractors/sources) events, faults, and occurrences (such as improper timing) on the safety Of the
subsystem。
That the safety design criteria in the hardware, software, and facilities specification(s) have been
satisfied。
That the method of implementation of hardware, software, and facilities design requirements and
corrective actions has not impaired or decreased the safety of the subsystem nor has it introduced any
Iew hazards Orrisks
Ofthe implementation Of safety design requirements from top level specifications to detailed design
specifications for the subsystem. The implementation of safety design requirements developed as part
ofthe PHA shall be analyzed to ensure that it satisfies the intent ofthe requirements.
Of test plan and procedure recommendations to integrated safety testing into the hardware and
software test Programs
That system level hazards attributed to the subsystem are analyzed and that adequate controlof the
potentialhazard is implemented in the design。
When software to be used in conjunction with the subsystemis being developed, the contractor performing the
SSHA shall monitor; obtain, and use the output Of each phase Of the formal software development process i
evaluating the software contribution to the SSHA.
The SSHA shall be updated as a result of any system design changes, including software design changes, that
affect system safety。
52
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _
timing

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
E.4 System hazard analysis (SHA)
E.4.1 Purpose
The system hazard analysis (SHA) shallinclude the following:
Verify system compliance with safety requirements contained i system specifications and other
applicable documents
b)
Identify previously unidentified hazards
associated
with
the subsystem
interfaces
and system
functional faults_
Assess the risk associated with the total system design;
icluding software, and specifically Of the
subsystem interfaces.
Recommend actions necessary to eliminate identified hazards andlor control their associated risk to
acceptable levels。
E.4.2 Description
An SHA shall be performed and documented to identify hazards and assess the risk Of the totalsystem design,
icluding software, and specifically Of the subsystem interfaces
This analysis shallinclude a review Of subsystem interrelationships for the following:
3 )
Compliance with specified safety design criteria
b)
Possible independent, dependent, and simultaneous hazardous events icluding systems failures;
failures ofsafety devices; common cause failures and events; and system interactions that could create
hazard Or result in an increase i
mishap risk
Degradation i the safety Of
subsystem
Or the total system from normal operation Of another
subsystem
Design changes that affect subsystems
Effects ofreasonable human CIrOIS
廿
Determination of the following:
1)
Potential contribution of hardware and software (including that which is developed by other
contractors/sources,
OI
commercial Off-the-shelf hardware
Or software) events; faults, and
Occurrelces (such as
improper timing) on safety Ofthe system
That the safety design criteria in the hardware, software, and facilities specification(s) have been
satisfied
3)
That the method of implementation of the hardware, software, and facilities design requirements
and corrective actions has not impaired or
degraded the safety Ofthe system nor has it introduced
any new hazards
The SHA may be combined with andlor performed using similar techniques to those used for the SSHA.
When software to be used in conjunction with the
is being developed, the contractor performing the
SHA shall monitor, obtain, and use the output of each phase of the formal software development process i
evaluating the software contribution to the SHA.
The SHA shall be updated as a result Of any system design changes including software design changes that
affect system safety。
53
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
System

IEEE Std 1474.
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
E.5 Operating and support hazard analysis (O&SHA)
E5.1 Purpose
'The operating and support hazard analysis (O&SHA) shall evaluate activities for hazards or risks introduced
into the system by operational and support procedures and evaluate adequacy Of operational and support
procedures used to eliminate, control, or abate identified hazards orrisks.
E5.2 Description
An O&SHA shall be performed and documented to examine procedurally controlled activities. The O&SHA
identifies and evaluates hazards resulting from the following:
The implementation Of operations or tasks performed by persons, considering the planned system
configurationlstate at each phase ofactivity
The facility interfaces; the planned environments (orranges thereof)
The supporting tools or other equipment;
icluding software controlled automatic test equipment;
specified for use; operationalltask sequence, concurrent task effects and limitations
The potential for unplanned events, including hazards introduced by human errors
'The human shall be considered an element of the total system, receiving both inputs and
initiating outputs
during the conduct ofthis analysis. The O&SHA shallidentify the safety requirements (or alternatives) needed
to eliminate or control identified hazards Or to reduce the associated risk to a level that is acceptable under
either regulatory or contractually specified criteria。
The analysis shallidentify the following:
Activities that ocCUr under hazardous conditions, their time periods, and the actions required to
mitigate risk during these activities/time periods
b)
Changes needed in functionalor design requirements for system hardwarelsoftware, facilities, tooling;
Or
supportltest equipment to eliminate or control hazards or reduce associated risks
Requirements for safety devices and equipment, includingpersonnelsafety and life support equipment
Warnings; cautions; and special emergency procedures, including those necessitated by failure Ofa
computer software-controlled operation, to produce the expected and required safe result orindication
Requirements
for packaging; handling; storage; transportation;
maintenance;
and
disposal
Of
hazardous materials
Requirements for safety training and personnel certification
Effects ofnondevelopmentalhardware and software across the interface with other system components
Or
subsystems
h)
Potentially hazardous system states under operator control
The O&SHA shall
document system safety assessment Of procedures involved in system production;
deployment;
installation,
assembly;
test;
operation;
maintenance。
servicing; transportation;
storage;
modification, and disposal。
The contractor shall update the O&SHA as a result of any system design or operational changes。
54
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
TM _

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
E6
Riskassessment
The hazard resolution process shall be initiated by defining the physical and functional characteristics of the
systemto be analyzed. These characteristics shall be presented in terms Ofthe major elements that make up the
system and its environment, including equipment, facilities; procedures, and people。
The hazards shall be identified. The techniques and methods used to identify the hazards shall include the
following:
Data
previous accidents or operating experience
Expert opinion and hazard scenarios
Checklists ofpotential hazards
Previous hazard analyses
Other analysis techniques as appropriate
Allidentified hazards shallbe assessed in terms ofthe severity or consequence ofthe hazard and the Probability
Ofoccurrence。
Riskassessment estimates (see Table E.1) shallbe used as the basis in the decision-making process to determine
whether individual system or subsystem hazards shall be eliminated, mitigated, or accepted. Hazards shallbe
resolved through a design process that emphasizes the elimination of the hazard. Resolution strategies or
countermeasures to be employed, listed in order ofpreference, shall be the following:
Designto eliminate hazards
b)
Design to control hazards
c)
Use safety devices
4)
Use warning devices
Implement special procedures
廿
Accept the hazard
Eliminate the subsystemlequipmentlrequirement
This process shall include full documentation of the hazard resolution activities. The effectiveness Of the
countermeasures Shall be monitored to determine that no Iew hazards are introduced. In
addition, whenever
substantive changes are made to the system, analyses shall be conducted to identify and resolve any new
hazards_
Table E.1 provides an example of the relationship between risk, severity, and probability as it may be applied
when assessing CBTC systems. The authority having jurisdiction may choose to modify this table to reflect
existing procedures orrequirements_
55
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
fron

IEEE Std 1474.
TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Table E.1-Riskassessment
Hazard severity
Frequency of
1-Catastrophic
2-Critical
3-Marginal
4-Negligible
OCCUTreICe
A-Frequent
Unacceptable
14)
Unacceptable (2A)
Unacceptable (3A
Undesirable (4A)
Acceptable with
B-Probable
Unacceptable (1B)
Unacceptable (28)
Undesirable (3B)
review (4B)
Acceptable with
Acceptable with
C-Occasional
Unacceptable (IC)
Unacceptable (2C)
review (3C)
review (4C)
Acceptable with
Acceptable without
D-Remote
Unacceptable (ID)
Unacceptable (2D)
review (3D)
review (4D)
Acceptable without
Acceptable without
E-Improbable
Undesirable ( 1E)
Undesirable (2卫)
review (3卫)
review (4)
Residualrisk levels
Unacceptable (1AIBIC/D, 2A/B/C/D, and 34)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered unacceptable; hazards shall be mitigated
through fail-safe designs.
Undesirable (1E,2,38, and 4A)
CBTC systems with residualrisks rated at this level are considered undesirable; depending on economic and
functional requirements, CBTC systems with hazards rated at this risk level may be considered acceptable
with explicit agreement
the authority having jurisdiction。
Acceptable with review (3C/D and 4B/C)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered acceptable with review; depending On
economic and functional requirements, CBTC systems with hazards rated at this risk level may be considered
acceptable with notification to the authority having jurisdiction。
Acceptable without review (3E and 4D/)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered acceptable without review; additional
design effort or system revision is not required to reduce the severity or probability of hazards with this risk
level。
Frequency ofoccurrence
Frequent
Likely to occur frequently; MTBHE is less than 1000 operating hours_
Willoccur several times in the life ofan item; MTBHE is equal to Or greater
B
Probable
than 1000 operating hours and less than 100 000 operating hours_
Likely to occur sometime in the life ofan item; MTBHE is equal to or greater
Occasional
than 100 000 operating hours and less than 10 000 000 operating hours
Unlikely; but possible to occur in the life ofan item; MTBHIE is equal to Or greater
D
Remnote
than 10 000 000 operating hours and less than
000 000 000 operating hours
So unlikely; it can be assumed occurrence Inay not be experienced;
卫
Improbable
MTBHIE is equal to or greater than
000 000 000 operating hours_
56
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
fron

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Hazard Severity
Catastrophic
Fatality, system Ioss, or severe environmental damage.
Critical
Severe injury, severe occupationalillness, major system or environmental damage.
Marginal
Major injury; minor occupational illness, Or minor system Or environmental damage。
Less than minor injury, occupational illness, or less than
Negligible
minor system or environmental damage_
57
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved

IEEE Std 1474.1TM-2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
Annex F
(informative)
Typical approaches to specifying CBTC system availability
F1
Traditional equipment-based approach
'The traditional approach to
defining system availability is the probability that the system is capable Of
operating and performing its intended function at a random point in time, as determined by the system MTBFE
and MTTRS, as shown in Equation (F.1):
CBTC system availability = system MTBFF / (system MTBFE + system MTTRS)
(E1)
Where
MTTRS is the sum ofthe system MTTR and the meantraveltimes for maintenance personnelto
travelto the site ofa failure and meantime to detect failure.
With this approach, the authority having jurisdiction would typically specify the following:
The quantitative CBTC system availability requirements
b)
The average travel times to be assumed for maintenance personnel to travel to the site ofa failure
The boundaries of the CBTC system covered by the availability requirement
The type Of CBTC failures to be included in defning the system MTBFE
For
given CBTC system configuration, the predicted CBTC system availability could be determined
analytically from estimates of subsystem MTBFFs and MTTRs。
ActualCBTC system availability could be determined
measurements ofactualin-service system MTBFE
and MTTRS, with appropriate adjustments for factors that are not included within the specified boundaries Of
the CBTC system_
F2
Alternative delayed trip-based approach
An alternative approach is to define CBTC system availability in terms Of the system 's contributions to the
desired on-time performance of the transit system, as shown in Equation (E.2):
Revenue trips delayed more than 4 by CBTC Type failure
CBTC system availability
(F.2)
Total scheduled revenue trips
Where
Revenue trip
is a scheduled movement Ofa train, Of defined length, from a point oforigin to a
destination;
tr
is a defined
delay threshold,
Wr
is a weighting factor associated with that delay threshold
With this approach, CBTC system availability would take into account the delays experienced by passengers_
As the passenger judges transit system availability on the basis Of the wait and travel time variations Of the
service provided, CBTC system failures that result in longer delays are penalized with a greater weighting
factor than failures that result in shorter delays. In general, delay thresholds would be related to the operating
headways, as delays at shorter headways impact on-time performance more significantly。
58
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE
All rights reserved 
System
fron
SW-

IEEE Std 1474.
TM
2025
IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements
The CBTC system availability requirementmay also consider other failure types, to the extent thatsuch failures
impact feet availability. For example; even i a train-borne CBTC equipment failure does not immediately
impact the on-time performance ofthe transit system, i
subsequently result in missed revenue trips ifthe
failure
repair time results in the train being unavailable for service:
With this approach, the authority having jurisdiction would typically specify the following:
The quantitative CBTC system availability requirements
b)
The various delay thresholds and weighting factors
The average traveltimes to be assumed for maintenance personnel to travel to the site ofa failure
The boundaries of the CBTC system covered by the availability requirements
The type Of CBTC failures to be included in defining the system availability
Fora given CBTC system configuration, the predicted CBTC system availability could be determined through
computer modeling from estimates Of subsystem MTBEFs and MTTRs, and an assumed system operating
Plan.
Actual CBTC system availability could be determined from measurements Of actual in-service
with
appropriate adjustments for factors that are not included within the specified boundaries Of the CBTC system。
59
Copyright @ 2025 IEEE.All rights reserved
may
delays,

IEE SA
STANDARDS
ASSOCIATION
RAISING THE
WORLDS
STANDARDS
Connect with Us on:
Facebook: facebook.com/ieeesa
内
Linkedln: linkedin.com/groups/1791118
Beyond Standards
beyondstandards.ieee.org
YouTube: youtube.com/ieeesa
standards.jeee.org
Phone: +1 7329810060
lEE
blog: