IEEE Std 1474.1TM 2004
(Revision of
IEEE Std 1474.1-1999)
TM
1474.1
IEEE Standard for Communications
Based Train Control (CBTC)
Performanceand Functional
Requirements
鼍
IEEE Vehicular Technology Society
Sponsored by the
Rail Transit Vehicle Interface Standards Committee
"
IEEE
25 February 2005
Print:
5H95275
3 Park Avenue; New York;
NY 10016-5997, USA
PDF:
5895275



Recognized asan
IEEE Std 1474.1
2004
American National Standard (ANSI)
(Revision of
IEEE Std 1474.1-1999)
IEEE Standard for Communications
Based Train Control (CBTC)
Performance and Functional
Requirements
Sponsor
Rail Transit Vehicle Interface Standards Committee
Of the
IEEE Vehicular Technology Society
Approved 2 February 2005
American National Standards Institute
Approved 23 September 2004
IEEE SA Standards Board

Abstract: Performance and functional requirements for
communications-based train control
(CBTC) system are established in this standard.A CBTC system is a continuous, automatic train
control system utilizing high-resolution train location determination, independent of track circuits;
continuous, high-capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside data communications; and train-borne and
wayside processors capable of implementing automatic train protection (ATP ) functions, as well as
optional automatic train operation (ATO) and automatic train supervision (ATS) functions。
In
addition to CBTC functional requirements; this standard also defines headway criteria, System
safety criteria, and system availability criteria for a CBTC system. This standard is applicable to the
full range of transit applications including automated people movers。
Keywords: automation, communications, signaling, train control
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc_
3 Park Avenue
New York;
NY 10016-5997, USA
Copyright @ 2005 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers_
Inc
AII rights reserved _
Published 25 February 2005. Printed in the United States of America_
IEEE is a registered trademark in the U.S
Patent & Trademark Office; owned by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Incorporated.
Print:
ISBN 0-7381-4486-X SH95275
PDF:
ISBN 0-7381-4487-8 $895275
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form, in an electronic retrieval system or otherwise; without the prior
written permission of the publisher。

巩卫
Standards
documents
are
developed
Within
thc
亚E
Socicties
and
the
Standards Coordinating
Committees of thc IEE Standards Association (亚EE-SA) Standards Board。
The IEEE develops its standards
through a consensus development process, approved by the American National Standards Institute; which
together volunteers rcpresenting varied viewpoints and interests to achieve the final product. Volunteers are not
ncccssarily mcmbers of the Institute and scrvc without compensation. While the IEE administers the process
and establishes rules to promote fairness in the consensus development process, the IEEE does not independently
evaluate, test; Or verify the accuracy Of any ofthe information contained in its standards
Usc of an IEE Standard is Wholly voluntary。
The IEEE disclaims liability for any personal injury; property
OI
other damage, of any nature whatsoever; whether special, indirect; consequential, or compensatory, directly Or
indirectly resulting from the publication, use Of,
Or reliance upon this, Or any other IEEE Standard document
Ihe IEEE does not warrant Or represent the accuracy Or content of the material contained herein, and expressly
disclaims any cxpress or implied warranty, including any implicd warranty of merchantability or fitness for a SpC-
cific purpose;
Or that thc UsC of thc material contained hercin is frcc from patent
infringement。
IEE Standards
documents are supplied *AS IS。
The existence of an IEEE Standard does not imply that there are no other ways to produce, test, measure, Pur-
chase; market
Or provide other goods and services related to the scope of the IEEE Standard. Furthermore, the
viewpoint expresscd at the time
standard is approved and issued is subject to change brought about through
developments i the state of the art and comments received from users Of the standard。
IEEE Standard is
subjected to review at least every five ycars for rcvision Or rcaffirmation_
Whcn a documcnt Is more than tive
ycars old and has not bccn rcaffirmed, i is rcasonable to conclude that its contents, although still of some value;
do not wholly reflect the present state of thc art。
UJsers are cautioncd to check to determine that
havc the lat-
cst cdition of any IEEE Standard。
皿 publishing and making this document availablc, thc IEEE is not suggcsting Or rendering professional or other
scrvices for; Or On behalf of, any person Or entity. Nor is the IEEE undertaking to perform any duty owed by any
other person Or
to another。
Persoh
utilizing this, and any other IEEE Standards document, should rely
UPOI
thc advice
0f
competent professional
i
determining the exercise of reasonable
Carc I
any given
circumstancCs
Interpretations: Occasionally questions may arise regarding the meaning Of portions of standards as
rclate to
specific applications。
When the necd for interpretations is brought to thc attention of IEEE, the Institute will initiate
action to prepare appropriate responses
Since IEE Standards represent a conscISlS Of concerned interests, it is
important to ensure that any interprctation has also received the concurrence of a balance of interests
For this
rcason, IEEE and thc members of its socicties and Standards Coordinating Committces arc not able to provide an
instant response to interpretation requests except in those cases where the matter has previously received formal
consideration。
At lectures; symposia, scminars, Or cducational courses, an individual presenting information On
IEE standards shall make it clear that his or her views should be considered the personal views of that individual
rather than the formal position, explanation, Or interpretation of the IEEE _
Comments for revision of IEEE Standards are welcome from any interested party, regardless of membership
affiliation with IEEE. Suggestions for changes in documents should be in the form of a proposed change of text,
together with appropriate suppolting comments_
Commcnts On standards and requests for interpretations should
be addressed to:
Secretary, IEEE-SA Standards Board
445 Hoes Lane
Piscataway, NJ 08854
USA
NOTE-Attention is called to the possibility that implementation of this standard may require use of subject
matter covered by patent rights. By publication of this standard;
10
position is taken with respect to the
existence
Or validity of any patent rights 讥 connection therewith
The IEE shall not be responsible for
identifying patents for Which a licensc may be rcquircd by an IEEE standard or for conducting inquiries into thc
|legal validity Or scope of those patents that are brought to its attention
Authorization to photocopy portions of any individual standard for internal or personal use is granted by the Insti-
tute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., provided that the appropriate fee is
t0
Copyright Clearance
Center
To arrangc for payment of licensing
please contact Copyright Clearance Center, Customer Service;
222 Rosewood Drive; Danvers, MA 01923 USA; +1 978 750 8400. Permission to photocopy portions of any
individual standard for educational classroom use can also be obtained through the Copyright Clearance Center。
brings
Every
they
entity
Any
they
paid
fee,

Introduction
[This introduction is not part of 亚EE Std 1474.1-2004,IEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control
CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements ]
This introduction provides some background on the rationale used to develop this standard. This information
is meant to aid in the understanding, usage, and applicability of this standard。
Conventional signalingltrain control systems rely almost exclusively on track circuits to detect the presence
Oftrains. Information on the status Of the track ahead is provided to train operators either through
wayside
signals or train-bome cab signals。 Ensuring compliance with the signals is achieved through operating
procedures, wayside automatic train stops, or train-bore supervisory equipment linked to the train 's braking
system。
These conventional systens
are effective 证
providing train protection but are
Iot
particularly
efficient in maximizing the utilization ofthe rail transit infrastructure, as a result ofa number of fundamental
limitations, specifically, the following:
3 )
The location of trains can only be determined to the resolution of the track circuits; 让 any part ofa
track circuit is occupied by
train, the Whole track circuit must be assumed to be occupied by the
train. Track circuits can be made shorter, but each additional track circuit requires additional way
side hardware, So there is an economical and practical limit to the number Of track circuits that can
be provided.
b)
The information that can be provided to
train is limited to
Small number Of
wayside signal
aspects Or a small number Of speed codes in a cab signal system。
For
wayside signal system with automatic train stops
but without continuous cab signaling;
Cnforcement is intermittent
CBTC systems overcome these fundamental limitations Of conventional track circuit-based systems, and
therefore, permit more effective utilization of the transit infrastructure. This is accomplished, for example;
by allowing trains to operate safely at much closer headways, by permitting greater flexibility and greater
precision in train control, and by providing continuous safe train separation assurance and overspeed protec-
tion. Additional benefits of CBTC technology include the economical support Of automatic train operations
(both on the mainline and in maintenance yards), improved reliability, and reductions in maintenance costs
through a reduction 讧
wayside equipment and real-time diagnostic information. The basic characteristics Of
CBTC system include the following:
1)
Determination Oftrain location, to a high degree Of precision, independent oftrack circuits。
2)
4
geographically continuous train-to-wayside and wayside-to-train data communications network to
permit the transfer of significantly more control and status information than is possible with conven-
tional systems_
3)
Wayside and train-borne vital processors to process the train status and control data and provide
continuous automatic train protection (ATP). Automatic train operation (ATO) and automatic train
supervision (ATS) functions can also be provided, as required by the particular application。
Although the benefits Of CBTC technology are recognized, there are currently no independent standards
defining the performance and functional requirements that need to be satisfied by CBTC systems in order to
realize enhanced performance, availability, train operational flexibility, and train protection. This standard
has been developed to address this.
IV
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。

Notice to Users
Errata
Errata,
让
any,
for
this
and
all
other
standards
Cahl
be  accessed
at
tC
following
URL:
Il
Standardsjeec orelreadinglieeelupdateslenatalindex html
Users
are
encouraged
t0
check this
URL
for
errata periodically.
Interpretations
Current interpretations can be accessed at the following URL: It卫:Ustandards ieee orgleadingleeelintewpl
皿@血 
Patents
Attention is called to the possibility that implementation of this standard may require use Of subject matter
covered by patent rights. By publication of this standard, no position is taken with respect to the existence Or
validity Of any patent rights i connection therewith。
The IEEE shall not be responsible for
identifying
Patents Or patent
applications for which
a license Iay be
required to implement an IEE standard or for
conducting inquiries into the legal validity or scope of those patents that are brought to its attention。
Participants
At the time this standard Was completed, the Communications-Based Train Control
Working Group had the
following membership:
Alan 卫. Rumsey, Chair
George Achakji
James Hoelsher
William Petit
Stephane Bois
Geoff Hubbs
Venkat Pindiprolu
Corinne Braban
Kenneth
Carl Schwellnus
Frederick Childs
John LaForce
Mickey Senase
Michael
Nartin Lukes
Errol Taylor
Nicolas Estivals
Dave Male
John Vogler
Harold Gillen
Charles Martin
Ken Vought
Harvey Glickenstein
Norman。
Robert 卫. Walsh
Vic Graponne
Bob Miller
David Zahorsky
The following members Of the individual balloting committee voted on this standard。
Balloters may have
voted for approval, disapproval, or abstention:
Corinne Braban
James Hoelsher
William Petit
Frederick Childs
Geoff Hubbs
Venkat Pindiprolu
Michael
Kenneth A_
Alan E. Rumsey
David Dimmer
John LaForce
Louis Sanders
Jeff Eilenberg
Martin Lukes
Jeffrey Smith
Nicolas Estivals
Charles Martin
John Vogler
Harvey Glickenstein
Norman
Robert 卫
Walsh
Ton McGean
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved
Karg
Crispo
May
Crispo
Karg
May

When the IEEE-SA Standards Board approved this standard on 23 September 2004, i had the following
membership:
Don Wright, Chair
Steve M.Mills, Vice Chair
Judith Gorman, Secretary
Chuck Adans
Mark S. Halpin
Paul Nikolich
Stephen Berger
Raymond Hapeman
工
W. Olsen
Mark D_
Bowmall
Richard J. Hollemnan
Ronald C. Petersen
Joseph 4
Bruder
Richard 珏. Hulett
8
Robinson
Bob Davis
Lowell G
Johnson
Frank Stone
Roberto de Marca Boisson
Joseph L. Koepfinger*
Malcolmn V_
Thaden
Julian Forster*
Hermann Koch
Topping
Arnold M. Greenspan
ThomasJ. McGean
Joe D
Watson
Daleep C
Mohla
*Member Emeritus
Also included are the
following nonvoting IEEE-SA Standards Board liaisons:
Satish K. Aggarwal, NRC Representative
Richard DeBlasio, DOE Representative
Alan Cookson, NIST Representative
Messina
IEE Standards Project Editor
11
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。
Gary
Doug
Don

Contents
Overview
1.1
Scope。
1.2
Purpose
1.3
Existing applications _
2
References
3
Abbreviations, acronyms, and definitions
3.1
Definitions。
3.2
Abbreviations and acronyms_
General requirements
4.1
Characteristics Of CBTC systems
4.2
Categorization of CBTC systems
4.3
Range Of applications。
4.4
Train configurations _
4.5
Train operating modes
4.6
Enteringlexiting CBTC territory
4.7
Train
operating speeds
10
5
Performance requirements
10
5.1
CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways.
10
5.2
CBTC factors contributing to achievable trip times
5.3
System safety requirements
5.4
System assurance requirements
14
5.5
Environmental requirements _
16
6
Functional requirements_
16
6.1
ATP functions
ATO functions
23
ATS functions _
24
6.4
Interoperability interface requirements 
28
Annex A (informative) Bibliography.
29
Annex B (informative) Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system. -
30
Annex C (informative) Typical CBTC parameters _
31
Annex D (informative) Typical safe braking model _
32
Annex E (normative) System safety program requirements
35
Annex F (informative) Typical approaches to specifying CBTC system availability .
44
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved
VII
16
6.2
6.3



IEEE Standard for Communications
Based Train Control (CBTC)
Performance and Functional
Requirements
1. Overview
This standard establishes performance and functional requirements for a CBTC system. It is divided into six
clauses. Clause 1 describes the scope and purpose Ofthis standard. Clause 2 lists references that are useful i
applying this standard. Clause 3 provides definitions that are either not found in other standards or have been
modified for use with this standard. Clause 4 defines the general operating
requirements for CBTC systens;
icluding train operating modes to be supported。
Clause 5 defines the performance requirements for CBTC
systens, including headway criteria, system safety criteria, and systen availability criteria. Clause 6 defines
the functional requirements
for CBTC systens。
including automatic train protection (ATP) functions;
automatic train operation (ATO) functions, and automatic train supervision (ATS) functions
1.1 Scope
This  standard
establishes
Set
Of performance
and
functional requirements necessary
for enhancing
performance, availability, operations, and train protection
a CBTC system。
1.2 Purpose
There are currently no independent standards defining the performance and functional requirements to be
satisfied by CBTC systems。
This standard will enhance performance; availability, operations, and train
protection and will facilitate new CBTC applications:
1.3 Existing applications
Existing CBTC installations and projects i progress
to thC
publication Of this standard need
Iot
comply with
the
ICW
Or revised
requirements Of this standard; IEE Std 1474.1-2004, except
where
specifically required by the authority having jurisdiction。
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE。
All rights reserved。
using
prior

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
2. Normative references
This standard shall be used in conjunction with the
following publications. In case Of a conflict between this
standard
and the referenced document, this standard shall take precedence。
Ihose provisions Of the
referenced documents that are not in conflict with this standard shall apply as referenced.
IEEE Std 1474.21-2003, IEEE Standard for User Interface Requirements in Communications-Based Train
Control (CBTC) Systems 1,2
TAI
IEE Std 14751
'-1999, IEEE Standard for the Functioning Of and Interfaces Among Propulsion, Friction
Brake and Train-borne Master Control on Rail Rapid Transit Vehicles。
IEEE Std 14771-1998 (Reaff 2003), IEEE Standard for Passenger Information System for Rail Transit
Vehicles。
TNI
IEE Std 1478'
'-2001, IEEE Standard for
Environmental Conditions for
Transit
Rail
Car Electronic
Equipment。
TNI
亚EE Std 1483
2000, IEEE Standard for Verification of Vital Functions i Processor-Based Systems Used
证 Rail Transit Control。
TI
IEE Std 1570
-2002, IEEE Standard for the Interface Between the Rail Subsystem and the Highway Sub-
system at a Highway Rail Intersection
TNI
IEE P1582
(Draft 1.0, February 2002 ), Draft Standard for Environmental Requirements for Rail Transit
Automatic Train Control Systems Wayside Equipment.
3. Abbreviations, acronyms, and definitions
3.1 Definitions
For the Purposes Of this standard, the
following terms and definitions apply. IEEE 100,
The Authoritative
Dictionary of IEEE Standards Ters, Seventh Edition [84]4, should be referenced for terms not defined i
this clause。
3.1.1
authority having jurisdiction:
The entity
that
defines the
Contractual
(including specification)
requirements for the procurement。
3.1.2 automated people movers (APMs): A guided transit mode with
automated operations, featuring
Vehicles that operate on guideways with exclusive right-of-way-
3.1.3 automatic train control (ATC): The system for automatically controlling train movement, enforcing
tain safety, and directing train operations. ATC must include ATP and may include ATO andlor ATS。
IThe IEEE standards or products referred to in this clause are trademarks of the Institute Of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; Inc_
ZIEEE publications are available fron the Institute Of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway; NJ 08854
USA (http:/Istandards.ieee.orgy
3This IEEE standards project was not approved by the IEEE-SA Standards Board at the tine this publication went to press. For infor-
mation about obtaining a draft, contact the IEEE _
4The numbers i brackets correspond to those Ofthe bibliography i Annex A 
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。
fully

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
3.1.4 automatic train operation (AT0): The subsystem within the ATC system that performs any Or allof
the functions Of speed regulation, programmed stopping, door control, performance level regulation, Or other
functions otherwise assigned to the train operator。
3.1.5 automatic train protection (ATP): The subsystem within the ATC system that maintains fail-safe
protection against collisions, excessive speed, and other hazardous conditions through a combination oftrain
detection, train separation, and interlocking:
3.1.6 aufomatic train supervision (ATS): The subsystem within the ATC system that monitors trains,
adjusts the performance of individual trains to maintain schedules, and provides data to adjust service to
minimize inconveniences otherwise caused by irregularities。
NOTE
The ATS subsystem also typically includes manual and automatic routing functions. $
3.1.7 auxiliary wayside system:
back-uP or secondary train control system, capable ofproviding fullor
partial ATP for trains not equipped with train-bome CBTC equipment andlor trains with partially or totally
inoperative train-borne CBTC equipment. The auxiliary wayside system may include train-bore equipment
and may also provide broken rail detection。
3.1.8 basic operating unit: (A) A single vehicle designed for independent operation. (B)
A permanent OI
semi-permanent combination, designed for independent operation, consisting Of two or more vehicles Ofone
OI more types
3.1.9 brake, emergency: Fail-safe, open-loop braking to
complete stoP, with an assured maximuml StoP-
ping distance considering allrelevant factors. Once the brake application is initiated, it is iretrievable (i.e., it
cannot be released until the train has stopped or a predefined time has passed):
3.1.10 brake, (maximum) service:
non-emergency brake application that obtains the (maximum) brake
rate that is consistent with the design of the brake system, retrievable under the control of master control。
3.1.11 car: See: vehicle。
3.1.12 civil speed limit: The maximum
authorized for each section of track, as determined primarily
by the alignment, profile, and structure
3.1.13 communications-based train control (CBTC):
A continuous ATC system utilizing high-resolution
train location determination, independent of track circuits; continuous, high capacity, bidirectional train-to-
wayside data communications;
and train-borne
and
wayside processors capable of implementing vital
functions_
3.1.14 commuter rail: A passenger railroad service that operates within metropolitan areas on trackage that
usually is part of the general railroad system。
The operations, Primarily for commuters, are generally Iul a5
part ofa regional system that is publicly owned or by a railroad company as part ofits overall service。
3.1.15 consist: The makeup Or composition (number and specifc identity) of individual units ofa train
3.1.16 dwell time: The time a tralsit unit ( vehicle or train) spends at a station Or StoP, measured as the inter-
val between its stopping and starting:
3.1.17 fail-safe: A design philosophy applied to safety-critical systems such that the result of hardware fail-
ure Or the effect Of software error shall either prohibit the system from assuming Or maintaining an unsafe
state Or shall cause the system to assume a state known to be safe。
i text, tables, and figures are given for information only and do not contain requirements needed to implement the standard。
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
speed
SNotes

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
3.1.18 headway: The time interval between the passing Of the front ends Of successive vehicles or trains
moving along the same lane or track in the same direction。
3.1.19 heavy rail transit: A mode ofrail rapid transit generally characterized by fully grade-separated con-
struction, operating on exclusive rights-of-way and station Platforms at the
levelof the vehicles_
3.1.20 interlocking: An arrangement Of switch, lock, and signal devices that is located where rail tracks
CrOSS, join, separate; and SO On。
The devices are interconnected 证 such
a Way that their movements must
succeed each other 讧
predefined order , thereby preventing opposing or conflicting train movements_
3.1.21 light rail transit:
A mode Ofrail transit characterized by its ability to operate on exclusive rights-of
way, street
running; center reservation running, and
crossings, and to board and discharge passengers
at track Or vehicle floor level
3.1.22 master control: The train-borne device or system directly providing the control signals to the train_
3.1.23 movement authority: The authority for a train to enter and travel through a specific section Oftrack。
边
given travel direction. Movement authorities are assigned, supervised, and enforced by a CBTC system
to maintain safe train separation and to provide protection through interlockings.
3.1.24 redundancy: The existence in a system Of more than one means Of accomplishing a given function。
3.1.25 reliability: The probability that
system will perform its intended functions without failure, within
design parameters, under specific operating conditions, and for a Specific period of time。
3.1.26 safe braking model: An analytical representation Of a train
performance while decelerating to
complete stop, allowing for a combination Of worst-case influencing factors and failure scenarios.
A CBTC
equipped train will stop in a distance equal to or less than that guaranteed by the safe
braking model。
3.1.27 safety critical: (A)
A
ternl
applied to
system
OI function, the correct Performance Of which is
critical to safety Of personnel andlor equipment. (B) A term applied to a systenn Or function, the incorrect
performance Of which may result in a hazard
NOTE
Vital functions are a subset of safety-critical functions_
3.1.28 self-revealing failure: Failures
Whose effects
OI
system operation
are
immediately and clearly
apparent
3.1.29 service, revenue: (A) Transit service
excluding deadheading
OI
layovers. (B)
service scheduled
for passenger trips。
3.1.30 system safety: The application of engineering and management principles, criteria, and techniques to
optimize all aspects Of safety within the constraints Of operational effectiveness, time, and cost, throughout
allphases Of the system life
3.1.31 System Safety Program: The combined tasks and activities Of system safety management and SyS-
tem safety engineering that enhance operational effectiveness by satisfying the system safety requirements
边
timely, cost-effective manner throughout the system life cycle。
3.1.32 train:
A consist Of one Or more basic
operating units。
3.1.33 unit: See: basic operating unit。
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。
floor
grade
Any
cycle。

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
3.1.34 vehicle:
land conveyance assembly for carrying or transporting people and objects capable oftra-
versing
guideway, having structural integrity and general mechanical completeness, but not necessarily
designed for independent operation。
3.1.35 vital function:
A function i a
safety-critical systemn that is required to be implemented i
fail-safe
IanICr.
3.2 Abbreviations and acronyms
APM
automated people mover
APTA
American Public Transportation Association
AREMA
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of- Way Association
ASCE
American Society Of Civil Engineers
ATC
automatic train control
AT0
automatic train operation
ATP
automatic train Protection
ATS
automatic train supervision
CBTC
communications-based train control
GEBR
guaranteed emergency brake rate
MTBF
mcan timc betwecn failure
MTBFF
mean time between functional failure
MTBHE
mean time between hazardous event
MTTR
mean time to repair
MTTRS
mean time tO restore service
O&SHA
operating and support hazard analysis
PHA
preliminary hazard analysis
SHA
system hazard analysis
SSHA
subsystem hazard analysis
SSPP
System Safety Program Plan
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
4. General requirements
4.1 Characteristics of CBTC systems
The primary characteristics Ofa CBTC system include the following:
High-resolution train location determination, independent oftrack circuits
6)
Continuous, high capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside data communications
Train-borne and wayside processors performing vital functions
4.2
Categorization Of CBTC systems
This standard recognizes that different configurations Of CBTC systems are possible, depending on the spe-
cific application. For example, a CBTC system may
Provide ATP functions only, with Io ATO or ATS functions
b)
Provide ATP functions; as well as certain
ATO andlor ATS functions, as required to satisfy the
operational needs Of the specific application。
Be the only train control system 讧
given application or may be used i conjunction with other
auxiliary wayside systems_
typical functional block diagram for a CBTC system is given in Amnex B。
4.3 Range of applications
The CBTC performance and functional requirements defined i this standard are intended to be
applicable -
to
the full range of transit applications,
icluding light rail,
rail, and commuter rail transit systems, and
shall be applicable to other transit applications, such as automated people movers (APMs) 让 CBTC is used
forATC.
NOTE
ASCE 21-96 [83] establishes additional requirements related to operating environment, safety requirements。
system dependability, and audio/visual communications for APM systens。
It is the intent Of this standard that tiered levels of functionality, and interoperability between equipment
provided by multiple vendors, are facilitated to the extent required by the authority having jurisdiction. AlI
CBTC systems shall include ATP functions.
4.4 Train configurations
CBTC system shall be capable Of supporting a variety Of train configurations, including the following:
Fixed-length unidirectional trains comprised Ofone or more basic operating units
b)
Fixed-length bidirectional trains comprised of one or more basic operating units
Variable-length unidirectional trains
Variable-length bidirectional trains
CBTC systen shall be capable Of supporting a mixed fleet oftrains, where specific trains, andlor classes
oftrains, have different performance characteristics.
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。
heavy

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
4.5 Train operating modes
CBTC-equipped trains may be operated by either a single person Or
multi-person crew。
A CBTC system
may also be
required to support operation Of trains without crews。
For operation of trains with crews, the train operator will typically be stationed in the lead car Of the train
and will be responsible for moving the train from station to station:
With a
multi-person crew, the conduc-
tor(s) willnormally operate from conductor position(s) within the train to operate the train ' s doors。
A CBTC
system shall support single-person train operation by combining the conductor and train operator display
information on the train operator  s display. For multi-person crews, conductor display information shall also
be provided on separate conductor displays。
For the purposes of this standard, operation of trains without crews includes both unattended and driverless
train operations。
With unattended train operations, there would normally be no crew member onboard the
train_
With driverless train operations, there may be
3 CrCW membcr onboard thc
train, but normally not 证
the driving cab_
This crew member, if present, would normally have no responsibility for operation Of the
train except for failure recovery_
CBTC-equipped trains (including CBTC-equipped maintenance vehicles) shall be capable of operating 边
various modes, depending On whether the train is operating i CBTC territory or non-CBTC territory, and
depending on the operational status of the train-bome andlor
wayside CBTC equipment。
Mixed-mode operation shall also be considered
normal operating mode, to the extent specified by the
authority having jurisdiction. Mixed-mode operation is defined as the simultaneous operation within CBTC
territory Of CBTC-equipped trains and trains that are not equipped with functional train-bore CBTC equip-
ment
(including maintenance vehicles). Mixed-mode operation may be used in one or more Of the following
WaYS:
regularly scheduled mode Of operation within CBTC territory
b)
An
ifrequent, unscheduled mode Of operation within CBTC territory
During the transition period only, as
9 ICW
CBTC system is cut-in
As a result oftrain-borne CBTC
equipment failures
4.5.1 Normal train operating modes in CBTC territory
4.5.1.1 CBTC-equipped trains
CBTC-equipped trains operating i CBTC territory shall operate, within ATP limits, under the protection Of
thC
CBTC  system。
The
train
Shall
be
capable of
controlled  manually
by
train   operator
Or
automatically by the CBTC systeni (supervised by the train Operator, 让 present);
95
Specified by the
authority having jurisdiction。
When operating automatically, some functions (such as door operation and
train departure initiation) may continue to be the responsibility Of the train operator andlor conductor(s); 讧
present
4.5.1.2
Non-CBTC-equipped trains
Trains not equipped with train-borne CBTC equipment andlor tains with inoperative train-borne CBTC
equipment that are operating i CBTC territory shall operate under the protection Of an auxiliary wayside
system andlor operating procedures, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
4.5.2 Failure mode train operations in CBTC territory
For light rail, heavy rail, and commuter rail applications operating with crews, i is an Operational require-
ment to continue to move trains
safely in the event of CBTC equipment andlor data communication failures,
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
being

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
possibly at reduced operating Speeds andlor increased operating headways when compared to normal train
operations.
As a consequence, a CBTC
system shall be designed to support degraded modes of operation in
the event Of failure and to continue to provide ATP with minimul reliance on adherence to operating proce-
dures. This shall be achieved through functional elements of the CBTC system itself; an auxiliary wayside
system (if specified by the authority having jurisdiction), or a combination Of both systems_
For fully automated people mover applications operating without crews, the extent to which the CBTC Sys-
tem shall be designed to support degraded modes of operation in the event of failure shall be as defined by
thC
authority having jurisdiction, and may include an ability to remotely reset train-borne equipment and the
ability to support automatic Pushlpull train recovery, as
as the ability to support manual train operations
and alternative
routing strategies。
For al1 applications, a fall-back plan, based on failure analysis and operating procedures, shall identify train
operating modes that will take advantage Of the degraded modes Of operation and recovery capabilities Of
the CBTC system_
The goal of the plan shall be to eliminate hazards to passengers and staffin accordance
with 5.3, while continuing to provide passenger service。
Specifically, failure mode train operations in CBTC territory shall address those CBTC system failures
affecting the following:
Alltrains operating within a particular area Of control
b)
A
particular train operating within any area Of control
4.5.2.1 CBTC system failures affecting all trains operating within a particular area Of control
皿 the event Of a CBTC system failure that affects all
CBTC-equipped trains operating within
particular
arCa
Of
control
Within
CBTC territory (e:8, wayside
CBTC  equipment
OI
wayside-to-train
data
communications failure), trains shall have the capability to provide continued safe operations under the
control of a train operator, and
41
With
thC
protection
of
311
auxiliary   wayside system
(让 specified by
thC
authority   having
jurisdiction); or
b)
Through strict adherence to operating procedures; Or
A combination of both items 8) and b).
When operating i this failure mode, ATP functions that reside within individual train-borne CBTC equip-
ment shall continue to function to the extent safety can be assured。
4.5.2.2 CBTC system failures affecting
particular train operating within any area of control
In the event Of a CBTC system failure affecting a particular CBTC-equipped train operating within any area
Of control within CBTC
territory (e.8., train-borne CBTC equipment failure), that train shall be capable Of
continued safe operations under the controlof a train operator, and
With
thC
protection
of
311
auxiliary   wayside system
(让 specified by
thC
authority   having
jurisdiction); or
b)
With the train speed limited by the propulsion system; Or
Through strict adherence to operating Procedures; Or
A combination of any or allofitems a),b), and c).
When operating in this failure mode,
ATP functions that reside within wayside CBTC equipment and within
other train-borne CBTC
equipment shall continue to function to the extent safety can be assured。
8
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.
well

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
4.5.3 Normal train operating modes in non-CBTC territory
For the Purposes Of this standard
non-CBTC territory is defined as any territory that is not equipped with
wayside CBTC equipment fully compatible with the train-borne CBTC equipment。
CBTC equipment installed on trains operating in non-CBTC territory shall include the necessary capabilities
to support transitions into CBTC territory. In addition, i specified by the authority having jurisdiction, train-
borne CBTC equipment may also perform other ATP functions while operating in non-CBTC territory, such
35
limiting train speed andlor providing zero speed detection。
I specified by the authority having jurisdiction, train-borne CBTC equipment operating in non-CBTC
territory may also interface with wayside equipment that is not fully compatible with the train-bore CBTC
equipment. In no case, however, shall the train-borne CBTC equipment provide an indication Of standard
CBTC operation
When
operating i
IOI-
CBTC territory;
unless thC
applicable authority
Or authorities
having jurisdiction over the train-bome and wayside equipment have ensured that standard CBTC operation
Is
supported by the integrated train-borne and wayside systems
4.5.4 Failure mode train operations in non-CBTC territory
Except where specified to perform certain ATP functions while operating in non-CBTC territory, failure of
the train-bore CBTC equipment shall have minimal impact on train operation。
The failure shall be indi-
cated to the train operator, i present
4.6 Enteringlexiting CBTC territory
4.6.1 Entering into CBTC territory
A CBTC system shall have precise knowledge of the limits Of CBTC territory and shall include the capabil-
ity to perform verification checks Of the train-borne CBTC equipment
to
entering CBTC territory.
The
checks shall be performed sufficiently in advance Of
into CBTC territory to verify the proper operation
Of the train-borne CBTC equipment (including any wayside CBTC equipment dependencies).
Ifthe verification check is passed, an indication to this effect shall be provided. Under normal circumstances
and subject to ATP constraints, it shall not be necessary for a train to come to
stop When entering CBTC
territory unless required for other operational reasons_
In the event that the verification check fails, an indication ofthe CBTC system failure shall be provided, and
tain operation may revert to the auxiliary
wayside signal system if available or to operating rules ifno aux-
iiary wayside signal systen is provided.
The results Of the verification checks shall be displayed on the ATS user interface. For trains operating with
crewS, the results Of the verification checks shall also be idicated to the train operator。
4.6.2 Exiting from CBTC territory
For trains operating with crews,
t0
exiting CBTC territory, a CBTC system may provide a visual indi-
cation to the train operator Of time andlor distance until the train will be exiting the CBTC territory。
When
known by the CBTC system; the train operator may also receive an indication Of the type of train control
system into Which the train will be traversing:
NOTE
Indications to the train operator may not be required 让 the transition between CBTC territory and Ion-CBTC
territory is operationally transparent to the train operator:
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
Prior
entry
Prior

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
Under normal circumstances and subject to ATP constraints; it shall not be necessary for a train to come to a
stop when exiting CBTC territory unless required for other operational reasons_
4.7 Train operating speeds
A CBTC system shall be capable of meeting the performance and functional requirements Of this standard;
over the full range of possible train operating speeds specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
5. Performance requirements
5.1 CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways
The
required design and operating headways (i.e., the minimum and scheduled headways) for both normal
and reverse directions shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction. Headway may be specified as
uninterfered andlor interfered.
皿n all cases, the design headway shall be constrained by the safe train separation requirements and the safe
braking modelof 6.1.2.1.
In the case Ofan uninterfered
headway,
3 train
Speed profile shall not be affected by a preceding train。
AII
trains shall, therefore, perform at the maximum allowed speed, depending on the civil speed limits and the
acceleration and braking capabilities Of the trains themselves. Operation at uninterfered headways facilitates
minimum end-to-end trip time for a given set ofstation dwell times。
Headways may be reduced (at the expense of increased trip times) with an interfered headway where a train
profile is affected by
preceding train such that
following train decelerates on the approach to
station and enters the station area at
reduced speed. Interfered headway may also be specified to support
multiple berthings at a station platform。
The design headway for a particular line and a particular set Of vehicles involves many factors that are out-
side the control of the CBTC system (e.8.,
track alignment, gradients, civil speed limits, train acceleration
and braking rates, station dwell times, terminal track configurations, driver reaction times)。
These factors
shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction. This standard addresses only those CBTC factors con-
tributing to achievable
headways, Of which the most significant are the following:
3)
Location (both accuracy Of measured end-of-train locations and resolution Of movement authority
limits for a given train),
icluding the frequency at which location reports and movement authorities
aTC
Udated。
b)
Speed, including both accuracy Of speed measurement and resolution Of speed limits established for
given train at a given location。
Communications delays, including nominal and
worst-Case transmission times Of command/status
Ilessages
between
wayside and train; and
Vice
Versa. (Commandlstatus
messages include; for
example, messages related to movement authority updates andlor location report updates: )
CBTC equipment reaction times, including maximum error accumulation, for both wayside and
train-borne
equipment, and for various operating modes, as applicable. (CBTC equipment reaction
times include, for example; the time required to establish new movement authority limits following
location
report
Updates;
tle
time
to
establish
IeW
Iovelent
authority
limits   through
a
interlocking; and the time to determine a new ATP profile
following movement authority update:)
CBTC system performance limitations (e.8., the maximum number of trains that can be processed
by the CBTC system, within
given area Of control):
CBTC automatic speed regulation algorithm。
10
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。
Speed

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
Typical values for the CBTC parameters in items a) through e) are given i Annex C。
5.2 CBTC factors contributing to achievable trip times
Trip time requirements shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction, consistent with train perfor-
mance and track alignment characteristics。
The minimum end-to-end trip times for
defined set of station dwell times will result from uninterfered
headway
profiles. The CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways, as identified in 5.1, will
also bC factors
contributing to the minimum achievable trip times。
5.3 System safety requirements
5.3.1 CBTC System Safety Program requirements
System Safety Program shall be instituted during the CBTC system planningldesign phase and shall
continue throughout the system
life cycle。
The CBTC System Safety  Program
Shall emphasize the
prevention Of accidents by identifying and resolving hazards i
systematic
IanhCr.
CBTC System
Safety Program Plan (SSPP) shall be developed for each CBTC application。
The CBTC SSPP shall be
prepared in accordance with the requirements Of E.1 of Annex E or the requirements of the American Public
Transit Association's
Manual
[81]
OI
equivalent requirements。
35
approved by the authority having
jurisdiction。
Implementation Of the CBTC SSPP shall specifically recognize configuration management issues, given the
importance Of software and hardware configuration control in maintaining system safety
5.3.2 CBTC hazard identification and risk assessment process
Hazard analyses shall be employed during the design Of a CBTC system to assist in the identification and
evaluation of potential hazards to assess their likelihood and severity and to document their resolution
As a
minimum,
preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) shall be conducted for each new CBTC system project。
Other detailed analyses, including systemlsubsystem hazard analyses, failure modes, effects and criticality
analyses, fault tree analyses, and operational and support hazard analyses, shall also be conducted if man-
dated by the CBTC SSPP。
These analyses Shall be conducted i accordance with E.2,巳.3,E.4, and E.5 of
Annex E Or
equivalent requirements, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction。
Allhazards identified through the CBTC System Safety Program shall be assessed in terms Ofthe severity Or
consequence
Of the
hazard
and the probability Of occurrence。
This  shall
bC
accomplished in general
accordance with the criteria outlined i }.6 of Annex 卫
Or the equivalent, as approved by the authority
having jurisdiction. Risk assessment estimates shall be used as the basis in the decision-making process to
determine whether individual system or subsystem hazards shall be eliminated, mitigated, or accepted。
This
process shall include full documentation of the hazard resolution activities。
Hazards shall be resolved through
design process that emphasizes the elimination Of the hazard:
ThC
effectiveness Of the hazard resolution strategies and countermeasures shall be monitored to determine that
no new hazards are introduced. In addition, whenever substantive changes are made to the system, analyses
shall be conducted to identify and resolve any new hazards.
As a minimum, a CBTC systen shall address the following criticallcatastrophic systen hazards through the
implementation of the ATP functions defined in 6.1:
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
speed

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
Train-to-train
collisions
(rear-end, sideswipe; head-on);
hazard
t0
be
addressed through
train
separation assurance (see 6.1.2), rollback protection (see 6.1.4), parted consist protection (see 6.1.6),
route
interlocking protection (see 6.1.11), and traffic direction reversal interlocks (see 6.1.12)
b)
Train-to-structure
collisions; hazard to be addressed through end-of-track protection (see 6.1.5) and
restricted route protection (see 6.1.16)
Train
derailments;
hazard
t0
be  addressed
through overspeed protection
(see
6.1.3),
route
interlocking protection
(see 6.1.11), and (where specified by the authority having jurisdiction)
broken rail detection (see 6.1.14)
Collisions between trains and highway vehicles (where highway crossing at
Cxists within the
limits of CBTC territory ); hazard to be addressed through grade-crossing warning devices that may
include interfaces to the CBTC system (see 6.1.15)
Hazards
t0
Work
CICWS
and
WoIk trains;
hazards
to
be addressed through CBTC
work
ZOIC
protection functions (see 6.1.13)
Hazards
to Passengers
associated
with train
movement
with
train
doors
ObCn;
hazards
t0
be
addressed through interface between the CBTC system and the train door system
where required by
the authority having jurisdiction) to provide door opening control protection interlocks (see 6.1.8),
ZCIO
speed detection (see 6.1.7), and departure interlocks (see 6.1.9)
Hazards associated with collisions with objects on the track; hazards to be addressed through inter-
faces between the CBTC system and intrusion detection devices (where specified by the authority
having jurisdiction) (see 6.1.16)
5.3.3 CBTC vital functions
To eliminate Or control to
a level acceptable to the authority having _
jurisdiction those hazards judged to be
unacceptable or undesirable through the risk assessment process Of 5.3.2,a CBTC system shall include, as a
minimulh, the Vvital functions identified i 6.1.
AlI vital functions of a CBTC system shall be designed and implemented in accordance with fail-safe
principles. Documentation of the means used, and proof that fail-safe principles have been met and the mean
time between hazardous event (MTBHE) requirements Of 5.3.4 have been satisfied, shall be required for
every CBTC system。
Verification that the processor-based portions Of
CBTC system
meet these minimunl System safety
requirements shall be completed in accordance with IEEE Std 1483-2000.
5.3.4 Quantitative CBTC safety performance requirements
For any CBTC system application, the CBTC wayside and
train-borne equipment located
Within any
contiguous portion Ofa one-way route that can be traversed by a train traveling at the specified maximum
authorized
for one hour or less shall have a total calculated aggregate MTBHE (total ofall critical and
catastrophic hazards) of at least
operating hours
This includes the maximum number Of other trains that
can be located in this contiguous portion Of a one-way route under the specified peak operating headway。
System safety documentation shall support these calculations and substantiate the
methodology used to
arrive
at thC result。
For
the purposes
of MTBHE calculations。
hazardous
event
shall include。
35
minimum, the occurrence Of any Of the specific hazards identified in 5.3.2_
NOTE
Ifthe end-to-end trip time for a given route is greater than
h, the MTBHE requirement for that route would be
adjusted proportionately。
As an
ilustrative example, i the specified end-to-end trip time (per 5.2) for a given one-way
route is 2h, and i the route includes 4 sets of
CBTC equipment, and ifa maximunl Of 10 trains can be operating
on the route at a given time (when operating at the specified peak headway, per 5.1), then the MTBHE of the combined
4 sets Of wayside CBTC equipment and 10 sets of train-borne CBTC equipment on that route would be at least 0.5 x 109
operating hours_
GInformation Oll references can be found in Clause 2.
12
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。
grade
speed
109
wayside

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
5.3.5 Basic safety design principles
5.3.5.1 Normal transit
system operations with no CBTC hardware failures
A CBTC system shall respond safely and correctly perform all ATP functions within the normal range Of
inputs and other operating and environmental conditions_
All conditions necessary for the existence Of any permissive state Or action shall be verified to be present
before the permissive state Or action is initiated by a CBTC system_
The
requisite conditions shall be verified
to be continuously present for the permissive state Or action to be maintained。
System safety shall
not depend
On thC
correctness
Of actions taken
OI
procedures
used by operating
Prsonnel。
Procedures shall not be considered
a Substitute for
safety functions that are to be vested in specific CBTC
components or equipment。
5.3.5.2 Abnormal transit
system operations with no CBTC hardware failures
CBTC system shall respond safely under conditions of abnormal system loading, abnormallimproper
iputs, and other abnormal external influences such as electrical, mechanical, and environmental factors。
5.3.5.3 Response to CBTC hardware failures
CBTC system shall respond safely under conditions of credible hardware failure。
NOTE
The AREMA Communications
Signals Manual, Part 17.3.3 [82], provides examples Of credible hardware
failures
Failure to Perform
logical operation or absence Of a logical input, output, or decision shall not cause an
ulsafe condition, i.e., systen safety shallnot depend upon the occurrence Of an action or logical decision。
Hazard analyses shall consider all credible CBTC hardware failure modes. Justification shall be provided for
conceivable failure modes that are not considered credible. The effect of each credible CBTC failure mode
shall be classified as either
self-revealing
OI
non-self-revealing;
as follows:
No credible single point CBTC hardware failure, whether self-revealing Or non-self-revealing, shall
CauSC an UnSafc condition_
No credible CBTC hardware failure in combination with one Or Iore
non-self-revealing failure shall
CauSC an Ulsafe condition
皿 the instance Of a non-self-revealing failure,
subsequent failure shall
not be considered independent。
The probability Of a critical or catastrophic hazard arising as
a result Of combinatiols Of simulta-
ICOUS
independent self-revealing failures shall be considered in the calculated CBTC MTBHE。
5.3.5.4 Recovery from CBTC hardware failures
combination Of functional elements Of the CBTC system itself; an auxiliary wayside system (if specified
by the authority having jurisdiction), andlor operating procedures shall provide for the safety Of train move-
ment under failure conditions;
icluding failure recovery -
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
13

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
5.4 System assurance requirements
5.4.1 General
The ability Of a CBTC system to accomplish the functional requirements Of this standard, under normal
conditions and under conditions Of equipment failure, is of paramount importance to the authority having
jurisdiction. This subclause establishes qualitative availability, reliability, and maintainability criteria for
CBTC systems and equipment in order to meet or exceed the on-time performance and fleet availability
objectives of the authority having jurisdiction, and thereby minimize delays experienced by passengers. In
addressing CBTC equipment failures,
distinction shall be made between the following failure types:
3 )
Type 1: Those failures; or combination Of failures; that impact on-time performance Of the transit
system_
b)
Type 2: Those failures, or combination Of failures, that do not impact on-time performance Of the
transit system, but do result in some other Ioss Of =
specified CBTC functionality。
Type 3: Those failures that do not impact on-time performance Of the transit system Or result in
loss Ofany specified CBTC functionality
because Of equipment redundancy).
The CBTC system availability requirement (see 5.4.2) shall include consideration Of all Type 1 failures, as
wellas the mean time to restore service (MTTRS) for Type 1 failures。
The CBTC system mean time between functional failure (MTBFF) requirement (see 5.4.3) shall include
consideration ofall Type 1
and 'Type 2 failures。
The CBTC system mean time between failure (MTBF ) requirement (see 5.4.3 ) shall include consideration Of
all Type 1, Type 2, and Type 3 failures。
While system availability。
MTBFF , and system MTBE predictions traditionally consider only hard-
Ware
failures, measurements Of achieved system availability, system MTBFF , and system MTBF shall also
consider software errors (i.e., software fails to perform intended function) as well as hardware failures。
The
following general recommended practices apply:
1)
Components and materials should be selected and
appropriate standards Of quality control and test
procedures should be employed to ensure the lowest practical hardware failure rates for individual
items ofCBTC
equipment (i.e., maximize the hardware portion of the system MTBE).
2)
Unless non-redundant
equipment is sufficiently reliable to satisfy the overall system availability
requirements, appropriate levels Ofequipment redundancy should be employed such that the failure
Ofa single component, processor, Or device will not render the CBTC system unavailable Or an oper-
ationally critical function nonoperative (i.e., maximize the system MTBFF).
3)
A_
CBTC system should icorporate degraded modes Of operation to minimize the operational
impacts Of equipment failures and to permit train movements to continue safely (i.e., maximize SyS-
tem availability)。
CBTC system downtime or unavailability Of an operationally critical function should be minimized
through the use Of local and remote diagnostic capabilities and appropriate operating and mainte-
IanCC
procedures [i.e., minimize mean time to repair (MTTR)].
5.4.2 System availability requirements
Quantitative CBTC system availability requirements shall be established by the authority having jurisdiction
with
appropriate consideration Of the impacts Of CBTC system and subsystem failures On the operation Of
the transit system. Typical methods for defining CBTC system availability are provided in Annex E.
14
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。
(e.8,
System

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
As
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, system availability analysislmodeling shall be used to
predict the system availability for
given CBTC system configuration, based on equipment reliabilityl
maintainability calculations, equipment redundancy provisions, and other defined assumptions_
As
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, system availability demonstration tests shall be performed
to determine actual CBTC systen availability over a defined period, to a given confidence level。
5.4.3 Equipment reliability requirements
Quantitative CBTC system and subsystem MTBF and MTBFE requirements shall be established by the
authority having jurisdiction, consistent with the CBTC system availability requirement 0f 5.4.2.
5.4.3.1 Design life
CBTC equipment shall have a design life Of 30 y.
NOTE
The ability Ofa CBTC system to remain in operation to the end ofits design life will be driven largely by
terml
availability Of spare
Specific requirements with respect to spare part availability shall be defined by the
authority having jurisdiction and do not form part Of this standard。
5.4.4 Equipment maintainability requirements
CBTC system shall be designed to minimize required maintenance (both preventive and corrective) by
maximizing the system MTBF and by including features that provide for ease Of maintenance by mainte-
nance personnel
The mean time to repairlreplace a failed piece of in-service CBTC equipment (i.e., first-level repair) shall
include on-site diagnostics, the replacement of failed components, and the
Of the repaired units, sub-
System, Or system, but shall exclude travel time to the site。
separate MTTR requirement may be defined
for second-level repair (i.e.,
repair Ofa failed line replaceable unit).
The first-level MTTR shall be no greater than 30 min。
The second level MTTR, i specified, shall be no
greater than 2h
Achievable repair times will be driven by equipment diagnostic provisions and available test equipment, as
wellas the quality Of the maintenance manuals and training: A CBTC system shall, therefore, include main-
tenance  and diagnostic capabilities to detect and
react to CBTC equipment failures. This shall include
remote diagnostics capabilities as well as local built-in test equipment and other fault displays for trouble-
shooting, and the timely identification Of failed components and functions_
Data logging capabilities shall also be provided in wayside and train-borne CBTC equipment. The logged
data shall be capable of
analyzed to be able to recreate the sequence Ofevents leading to an incident。
This will allow maintenance personnel to identify the cause Of any failure andlor mis-operation Of CBTC
equipment that cannot be identified by the in-built diagnostics of the equipment. The scope of logged CBTC
events shall be established by the authority having jurisdiction。
CBTC system design shall include capabilities to permit periodic verification Of ATP hardware, software;
and data,
icluding verification Of correct response to interference On the train-to-wayside data link. To the
Cxtent
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall also include capabilities to facili-
tate modifications (by the user) to CBTC system parameters, track databases; and applications software. The
supplier Of the CBTC system shall identify to the authority having jurisdiction those specific changes to
CBTC system parameters, track databases, and applications software that will have no ipact On system
safety。
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
15
long
parts。
testing
shop
being

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
WARNING
Changes made to CBTC system parameters, track databases, and application software, other than those
identified by the supplier as not impacting safety, can affect safe system operation. Prior to implementing
any such
applicable hazard analyses Of 5.3.2 shall be reassessed to verify that the modified
system Will still meet all requirements Of this standard including; but not limited to, 5.3.3,5.3.4, and
5.3.5. Changes shall be implemented in accordance with the CBTC SSPP 0f 5.3.1.
5.5 Environmental requirements
Train-borne CBTC equipment shall comply with the requirements Of IEEE Std 1478-2001.
Wayside CBTC equipment shall comply with the requirements Of IEEE P1582/01.0.
6. Functional requirements
A CBTC system shall include the capability for providing ATP, ATO, and ATS functions
ATP functions
shall provide fail-safe protection against collisions, excessive speed, and other hazardous conditions
ATP
functions shall have precedence over both the ATO and ATS functions.
ATO functions shall control basic
operations that would otherwise be performed by a train operator and shall do so within the protection limits
iposed by ATP.ATS functions shallprovide systeni status information and the means to monitor and over-
ride the automatic control for various functions of the system
The CBTC train-to-wayside communications interface shall be sufficient to support all required ATP, ATO,
and ATS functions_
The data link shall provide continuous geographic coverage within CBTC territory and
shall support train operations in tunnels, tubes, and cuts, on elevated structures, and at grade. The data link
shall support bidirectional data transfer and shall exhibit sufficiently low latency to support the defined per-
formance requirements_
The data link shall include a protocol structure to support safe, timely, and secure
delivery Oftrain control messages
6.1 ATP functions
AllATP functions shall be vital functions and shall be
designed and implemented in accordance with 5.3.
CBTC system shall be capable of providing bidirectional ATP
6.1.1 Train locationltrain speed determination
6.1.1.1 CBTC train locationltrain speed determination
CBTC train locationltrain
determination shall be
required ATP function for any CBTC system
configuration
A CBTC system shall establish the location, speed, and travel direction ofeach CBTC-equipped train oper-
ating in CBTC territory。
CBTC train location determination shall safely and accurately establish the location of both the front and
rear Of the train
The CBTC train location determination function shall provide sufficient train location
resolution and accuracy to support the performance and safety requirements Of this standard. Train location
resolution and accuracy parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C。
16
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。
changes,
Speed

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
The CBTC train location determination function shall be
self-initializing and shall automatically detect and
establish the location of each CBTC-equipped train as it enters CBTC territory and on recovery from CBTC
equipment failures, without requiring manual input of train location or train length data_
The CBTC train
determination function shall provide sufficient
measurement resolution and
accuracy to support the performance and safety requirements Of this standard. Speed measurement resolu-
tion and accuracy parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C
A CBTC system shall compensate for the effects Of measurement inaccuracies on train location and speed
determination. Specifically, 让 the CBTC train locationlspeed determination function is dependent Upon
wheel rotation; the CBTC system shall correct for position errors induced by the slipping or
sliding Of
Wheels and shall
correct for position errors caused by variation i
Wheel Sizc due
to wear
trueing;
Or
replacement。
6.1.1.2 Secondary train location determination
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, an auxiliary wayside system may provide secondary train
location determination to establish if a section of track is occupied by one or more trains, including trains not
equipped with train-bore CBTC equipment andlor trains with inoperative train-borne CBTC equipment. It
will not be necessary to determine the location Of non-CBTC-equipped trains, or trains with inoperative
train-borne CBTC equipment, to the same accuracy as CBTC-equipped trains
6.1.2 Safe train separation
Safe train separation shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration。
Safe train separation shall be provided between all trains operating 证 CBTC territory, whether Or not the
trains are CBTC equipped.
A CBTC system shall provide safe train separation between CBTC-equipped trains. Safe train separation
shall be based upon the
principle of an instantaneous (brick wall) stop ofthe preceding train。
For mixed-mode operation (see 4.5 ), safe train separation shall be provided through an auxiliary wayside
andlor through strict adherence to operating procedures,
35
specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
Ifsecondary train location determination is provided through an auxiliary wayside system (see 6.1.1.2), then
for
CBTC-equipped train following a non-CBTC-equipped train or
a train with
ioperative train-borne
CBTC equipment, a CBTC system shall limit the movement authority Of the following train to the boundary
Ofthe section Of track occupied by the non-CBTC-equipped or failed train. If specified by the authority hav-
ing jurisdiction, the CBTC system may further limit the movement authority to the route
Ofa
route occupied by the non-CBTC-equipped train or failed train。
The CBTC safe train separation function shall consist of the
following:
The calculation Of the ATP profile (i.e., the profile Of safe speed as
function Of train location);
derived from fixed ATP data
permanent speed limits) and variable ATP data (e.8., temporary
limits and movement authority limit)
b
The supervision and enforcement Of the ATP profile calculated by the CBTC
The ATP profile shall be governed by a safe braking model (see 6.1.2.1) and shall ensure that under no cir-
Cuhlstalces
(including failures) will the movement authority limit be exceeded by a CBTC-equipped train。
The movement authority limit shall be the most restrictive of the following:
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
17
speed
speed
System
Point
entry
(e.8;
speed
System

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
The rear of a
CBTC-equipped train ahead (as determined by the CBTC train location function i
6.1.1.1), with allowance for any location uncertainty
The boundary Ofa section Of track occupied by a non-CBTC-equipped train Or a train with inopera-
tive train-borne CBTC equipment (as determined by an auxiliary wayside system, i provided, per
6.1.1.2)
The end-of-track (see 6.1.5)
The entrance to an interlocking; when the route is not verified as
aligned and locked (see 6.1.11)
The boundary Of a section Of track with an opposing traffic direction established (see 6.1.12)
The boundary Of a blocked track (see 6.1.13)
I
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, the entrance to
highway grade crossing where
warning devices are not confirmed to be operating (see 6.1.15)
The entrance to
a route that is detected to be unsafe for train movement (see 6.1.16)
I
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, the CBTC safe train separation function shall support auto-
matic close-up oftrains and automatic coupling and uncoupling oftrains in designated areas。
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided to bypass the CBTC safe train
separation function to allow
train
under the control of a train operator, to travel beyond its movement
authority limit (e.8., at a restricted speed), for failure recovery Purposes_
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided to
back (i.e., make more
restrictive)
a Iovement
authority limit previously granted to a train. If the train were approaching or braking
toward the original movement authority limit, the train
be i Violation Of the new ATP profile. Under
such circumstances,
CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake
application. The brake application
may be an immediate emergency brake application ora
supervised service brake application, as specified by
te
authority having jurisdiction (see 6.1.3).
6.1.2.1 Safe braking model
Safe
braking model shall be developed for each CBTC application。
The safe braking model shall, as a minimum, include consideration Of the following:
41
Location uncertainty Of lead train (including rollback tolerance)
b)
Location uncertainty Of following train
Train length
4)
Train configuration (see 4.4)
e)
Allowable overspeed permitted by the CBTC system
[
Maximum CBTC speed measurement error
8)
CBTC system reaction times and latencies
h)
Maximum
train acccleration
rate
possible at the time an overspeed condition is detected by the
CBTC system
j
Worst-case
rcaction
times
to disable the
propulsion system
and apply the
emergency
brakes
following detection Of an overspeed condition by the CBTC system
j)
Guaranteed emergency brake rate (GEBR)
k)
Grade
The GEBR shall be the minimum emergency brake rate achieved by 3 train on level tangent track under the
range Of environmental conditions and worst-case credible latent brake equipment failure modes, Which can
be anticipated to exist for that train in the specific
application. The GEBR shall be specified by the authority
18
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。
Pull
may

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
having jurisdiction and shall include consideration Of maximum passenger load (plus snow and ice load i
applicable), minimum anticipated adhesion levels, and maximum design tailwind。
typical safe braking model is provided in Annex D.
A CBTC system shall have the capability to support multiple safe braking models to accommodate different
train
accelerationlbraking rates for different classes and configurations Of trains operating simultaneously
within
CBTC territory
and
t0
accomnmodate
automatic
close-UP
and
automatic   couplingluncoupling
capabilities, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
A CBTC system shall incorporate appropriate
protection to ensure that the correct safe braking model is applied for a given train at a given location。
6.1.3 Overspeed protection and brake assurance
Overspeed protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration
I
establishing; supervising, and enforcing the
ATP Profile;
35
governed by the safe braking model Of
6.1.2.1,
CBTC system shall ensure that under no circumstances,
including failures, will the train 's actual
exceed its safe
Thc safe
shall be derived by considering the
most restrictive Of the
following:
The permanent speed limits on sections oftrack within the ATP profile
b)
temporary
restrictions On sections Oftrack within the ATP
permanent speed restriction applicable to the particular class or configuration oftrain
speed restrictions enforced on the train because oftrain-borne failure conditions
The Iaximum
that
would
allow the train to stop safely
to the limit Of the train 's
movement authority Or to slow down sufficiently to meet appropriate permanent or temporary speed
restrictiols upon
entering that section Oftrack
Speed limits and restrictions shallapply when any portion of the train is within the speed limit area。
Speed limitlspeed restriction resolution parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C
Enforcement Of the calculated
ATP profile shall be achieved by comparing the CBTC-determined train
with the ATP profile
at the CBTC-determined train location. If the ATP profile speed at that
location is exceeded, the CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake application。
The brake
application may be
an immediate emergency brake
application
OI
supervised service brake
application, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. In the latter case, a CBTC system shall monitor
te achieved brake rate to ensure an
acceptable brake rate is achieved within a predetermined time frame; i
not, i shall immediately apply the emergency brakes。
The safe braking model shall include appropriate
allowances for reaction times associated with this brake assurance function
6.1.4 Rollback protection
Rollback protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration
A CBTC systen shall monitor actual train travel direction and shall compare measured travel direction with
the CBTC establishedlcommanded direction Of traffic. Train motion against traffic for more than
specified
rollback tolerance shall result in the CBTC system initiating an emergency brake application。
Rollback
detection criteria for typical CBTC systems are included i Annex C.
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
19
speed
speed。
speed
Any
speed
Profile
Any
Any
speed
Prior
speed
speed

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
6.1.5 End-of-track protection
End-of-track protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration that permits
the operation oftrains Up to, or in close proximity to, an end-of-track terminus。
End-of-track protection shall be incorporated into, Or function in conjunction with, overspeed protection to
prevent trains frol
over-traveling the end-of-track or, i buffers are specified, to prevent trains from exceed-
the design limits for impact with an end-of-track buffer. End-of-track protection design shall be based on
the safe braking modelof 6.1.2.1.
6.1.6 Parted consist protection and coupling and uncoupling of trains
Where separate vehicles can be coupled together in a consist of two or more vehicles or units to form
train,
CBTC system shall have the capability Of detecting and protecting parted trains. Parted consist protection
Shall be
required regardless Of whether the individual vehicles or units are considered to be permanently
coupled or Whether
arC
routinely uncoupled for maintenance or operational purposes。
CBTC system shall also support operating requirements for coupling and uncoupling Of trains, including
automatic update of the consist length within the CBTC system。
Ifspecified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system may assume a fixed, worst-case, maximum
tain length for a given class Of trains operating in CBTC territory, with
reliance on operating procedures
to ensure this maximum train length is not exceeded。
6.1.7 Zero speed detection
Zero speed detection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration and shall be i
accordance with the requirements Of 5.10 of IEEE Std 1475-1999.
Zero speed detection criteria for typical CBTC systems and applications are included in Annex C。
6.1.8 Door opening control protection interlocks
Iftrains are operated with crews, door open control protection interlocks may be a required ATP function, at
tle
option of the authority having jurisdiction. For operation Of trains without crews, door open control
protection interlocks shall be mandatory。
These interlocks; 让 provided, shall
Clsure that the
following
conditions are satisfied prior to enabling the opening of the train doors (and platform doors, if fitted):
3)
The train is 'properly aligned'' at
designated stopping point, where the designated stopping
and
required tolerances shall be as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
b)
There Is
platform (or other location specified by the authority having jurisdiction) on the side Of
the train for which the door opening is allowed。
Zero speed is detected, in accordance with 6.1.7.
Thc train is constrained
against motion
Selective door open enable shall be possible for those applications where the train length exceeds the
form length。
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided for a local manual bypass Of the
preceding door open control protection interlocks, for failure recovery purposes.
20
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。
ie
they
point
Plat-

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
6.1.9 Departure interlocks
If trains are operated with crews, departure interlocks may be a required ATP function, at the option of the
authority having jurisdiction. For operation of trains without crews, departure interlocks shall be mandatory。
These iterlocks, if provided, shall prevent a stationary train from moving (e.8 , by disabling the propulsion
system) unless all train doors (and platform edge doors, 迕 fitted) are properly closed and locked, in accor-
dance with the requirements Of 5.14 of IEEE Std 1475-1999.
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided for a local manual bypass Of the
preceding departure interlocks, for failure recovery purposes。
6.1.10 Emergency braking
The train '8 emergency brake system shall be capable of bringing the train to a stop within the assured stop-
ping distance determined by the safe braking model of 6.1.2.1. Specific criteria for resetting the emergency
brakes to allow normal operation to resume shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction. If condi-
tions
as determined by ATP) are
not correct for train movement, the emergency
braking shall remain
applied regardless Of any reset signals Or actions, except that facilities may be provided for
local Ianual
bypass of the ATP functions for that train to permit manual train operation for failure recovery purposes
Use Of such facilities shall require strict adherence to operating procedures to
CnSurC the
safety Of train
Iovenents
If correct ATP conditions exist after the emergency brakes have been reset, the train shall be
permitted to move Or continue to move; however; 让 the actual train
speed again exceeds the ATP profile
speed or a subsequent malfunction ocCUIS, emergency
braking shall be
as before。
6.1.11 Route interlocking
CBTC system shall provide route interlocking functions equivalent to conventional interlocking practice
to prevent train collisions and derailments
These functions shall include locking of the route i advance Of
the train entering the interlocking (time or approach locking) and once the train is in the interlocking (route
locking).
Ihe switches shall also be locked when the track section containing the switch is occupied by a
train (detector
locking). Locking functions shall also apply to moveable bridges and similar right-of-way
apparatus. Sectional release (ofroutes behind a train) may be provided where specified by the authority hav-
jurisdiction。
NOTE
The AREMA Communications
Signals Manual, Sections 2 and 16 [82], provides examples ofrecommended
practices for use in interlocking design。
movement
authority shall not be advanced into an interlocking until the appropriate route is set and
locked. Once
movement authority has been advanced through an interlocking; the affected route shallnot
be released and conflicting routes cleared unless either the train has traveled through and is verified clear Of
the interlocking Or the movement authority is pulled back short of the interlocking and is in effect。
Where an auxiliary wayside system is specified by the authority having jurisdiction, interlocking functions
may be provided by separate interlocking equipment, which is based on train position established by
secondary train detection subsystem. In this case,
CBTC system shall interface to and may modify the
conventional interlocking
functions
based
On
train  position established by the CBTC
train  location
determination function; to safely enable the enhanced performance capabilities Of a CBTC system to be
realized。
6.1.11.1 CBTC interfaces to a separate interlocking
Where an auxiliary wayside system Or separate interlocking is specified, a CBTC system shall interface to
iterlockings as follows:
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
21
applied
ing二

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
Time
OI
approach locking shall apply; except i
the
event Of
route
canceled for
a1
approaching CBTC train (i.e., the movement authority is pulled back short of the interlocking and is
讧
effect). In this case; if the train is greater than
safe braking distance
the entrance to the
interlocking (as determined by the safe braking modelof 6.1.2.1) or the train stops
t0
entering
the interlocking, the route shall be released without running further time_
b
Traffic locking may be overridden so that CBTC-equipped trains may move in opposing directions
within their respective movement authorities on the same track at the same time.
Wayside signals and their aspects may be provided as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
CBTC system may override the conventional aspects to
cause the signal(s) to display CBTC
aspect(s) only to CBTC-equipped trains。
6.1.11.2 Responses to CBTC train location failures
In the event Of a failure Of the CBTC train location determination function, route locking shall remain i
effect until the train is proven to be clear of the interlocking by the CBTC system (i.e., the train is subse-
quently determined to be clear of the interlocking limits), or through operating procedures, or a combination
ofboth approaches.
I the event Of a failure Of the CBTC train location determination function i an interlocking where train
location is also capable of being detected by means Of a secondary system, CBTC system overrides of the
interlocking functions may be released, provided route and other locking functions are maintained by the
auxiliary wayside system So as to prevent the movement Of a switch in front Of and under the train until the
tain is proven to be clear Of the interlocking:
6.1.11.3 Response to loss Of switch indication
In the event of a loss of switch indication once a movement authority has been issued through a1 interlock-
CBTC system shall
back the movement authority to the entrance Of the interlocking. If a train is
already within
safe braking distance Of the switch, the CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake
application (see 6.1.2).
6.1.12 Traffic direction reversal interlocks
Traffic direction reversal interlocks shall be
required ATP function for any CBTC system application
requiring bidirectional operations, in order to support reversal of train direction at terminal stations and to
support intermediate turn backs and shuttle modes of operation, for example。
It shall not be possible to extend the movement authority for a train into
a section Oftrack where an opposing
traffic direction has already been established。
A reversal of traffic direction within a section Of track shall not be possible unless
AIltrains within that section oftrack are at zerO
and constrained against motion in the original
traffic direction, and
b)
The movement authorities for a11 trains outside of that section oftrack do not extend into the section
and are constrained from
extended into the section in the original traffic direction。
6.1.13 Work zone protection
A CBTC system shall not grant movement authorities to trains to operate into out-of-service (blocked)
tracks Or
through switches blocked in other than the required position and shall enforce restricted speeds On
approach to and through defined work zones (see 6.3.7.4). A CBTC system may also include capabilities to
preclude ATO mode of operation through a work zone。
22
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。
being
from
prior
pull
ig,
speed
being

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
6.1.14 Broken rail detection
Where
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system may interface to an auxiliary wayside
for Purposes of broken rail detection.
A CBTC system `s reaction to a detected broken rail shall be as
specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
6.1.15 Highway grade-crossing warning
Where highway crossings at
exist within the limits Of CBTC territory and
where
specified by the
authority having jurisdiction;
CBTC system may interface to grade-crossing warning devices to permit
controlof such devices based on CBTC location reports and to coordinate movement authorities through the
crossing based on the status from such devices. Specific requirements shall be defined by the authority hav-
ing jurisdiction and may include the following:
a)
Constant (and consistent) warning times, independent of train speed or accelerationldeceleration
b)
For trains making station stops
tO
crossings, delayed activation Of the warning devices until the
train is ready to depart the station
When a train Clears
crossing in multiple track areas, continued activation Of the warning devices a
second train would have reactivated the devices within a predefined time interval
Advance warning for priority control of traffic lights or other highway signage, in accordance with
IEE Std 1570-2002 andlor the AREMA Communications & Signals Manual, Part 3.1.10 [82].
6.1.16 Restricted route protections
Where
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall include capabilities to prevent a
train from
entering
a route that is unsafe for movement Of that type of train due to mechanical, civil, electri-
Cal
Or other
predefined temporary or permanent conditions Of the train Or route, Or through interfaces to
intrusion detection devices, platform edge doors (where fitted), andlor other devices capable Of detecting
hazards that impact route integrity.
6.2 ATO functions
For operation Of trains without crews,
CBTC system shall, as
minimul, be capable Of providing allof
the ATO functions as defined in this subclause, to automatically operate trains in accordance with prescribed
operating criteria within the safety constraints imposed by ATP。
For operation Of train with crews, the required ATO functions shall be as specified by the authority having
jurisdiction。
The CBTC wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data communications interface shall be sufficient to SuP-
port all required ATO functions。
6.2.1 Automatic speed regulation
The starting, stopping; and speed regulation Of the train as it travels along the track shall be automatically
controlled by a CBTC system so that the speed, acceleration, deceleration, and jerk rates are within Specified
passenger comfort limits (as defined by the authority having jurisdiction) and the train
is below the
overspeed limits imposed by AIP.
Station stopping accuracy shallbe as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
A CBTC systen shall support multiple ATO speeds, acceleration, and service brake rates in accordance with
the train operator (i present) or ATS inputs
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
23
System
grade
prior
Speed

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
6.2.2 Platform berthing control
CBTC system shall be capable of implementing any Of the following platform berthing control modes:
Where the platform length is approximately equal to the train length, a CBTC system shall allow
train to enter a station Platform only if there is sufficient room to
berth or if the preceding train
has 3 movement
authority that shall allow it to fully leave the platform area and it has begun to move
out Of the station (i.e., within ATP constraints, train movement shall be controlled to minimize the
likelihood of the train coming to a Stop when only partially within the station platform limits).
b)
Where the platform length is longer than the train length, a CBTC system shall support multiple
stopping positions within the platform area, as defined by the authority having jurisdiction。
Where the platform length supports multiple train berthings, a CBTC system shall allow
a train tO
enter a platform While another train already occupies an alternative berth。
Where the platform length is shorter than the train length, a CBTC system shall support platform
berthings consistent with the door opening control protection interlocks Of 6.1.8_
6.2.3 Door control
A CBTC system shall be capable Of automatically controlling train doors (and platform edge doors, where
fitted)
passenger boarding and discharging:
As defined by the authority having jurisdiction, automatic door control may be limited to the following:
41
Automatic door opening only (with or without passenger door open requests)
b)
Automatic door
closing only
Neither automatic door opening nor closing
Ifautomatic platform edge doors are provided,
shall be controlled as a set with the matching train doors
such that the train and matching platform edge doors open and close together. It shall be possible to manu-
ally disable the operation Of any door set (both the train and the matching platform edge door) without
affecting the automatic operation Of other door sets_
The amount Of time thc train is to remain i the station
with doors open may be established by ATS (6.3.5.1) and automatically controlled by ATO.
6.3 ATS functions
6.3.1 General
I specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC may interface to, Or be integrated with, an ATS
system. Under such circumstances, and to the extent specified by the authority having jurisdiction, CBTC-
related
ATS
functions shall be implemented
a5
defined i this subclause i
Order
to benefit from the
characteristics Ofa CBTC system as defined in 4.1, namely, the availability Of the following:
Train location information to a high precision, independent of track circuits
Continuous wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data communications link
Train-borne and wayside data processing capabilities
The CBTC-related ATS functions defined in this subclause shall be fully integrated with other conventional
ATS functions and other non-ATS functions, as may be
specified by the authority having jurisdiction, to
support overall service management for the transit systeni and provide for a single consistent user interface.
The CBTC data communications network, inclusive Of the wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data com-
munications interface, shall be sufficient to support those CBTC-related ATS functions specified by the
authority having jurisdiction。
24
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.
fully
during
they

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
6.3.2 ATS user interface
Each ATS user interface shall display all information and implement all control actions, as defined in 6.3,
Within acceptable latencies as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
Mandatory display data and user information inputs shall be in accordance with IEEE Std 1474.2-2003.
The ATS user shall be able to override any automated CBTC-related ATS functions defined in 6.3 _
Certain ATS functions (such as stopping a train en route and the
application and removalof temporary speed
restrictions, switchltrack blocking, Or work zones) can potentially introduce system hazards and the specific
implementation of these functions shall be considered in the hazard analyses required by 5.3.2.
ATS func-
tions arC not
required to be implemented i
a fail-safe manner; however, the hazard analyses shall take into
account, as a minimum, the probability Of
Safety-related commands not being executed when initiated by an ATS user,
b)
The CBTC system prematurely removing safety-related commands initiated by an ATS user
The CBTC system executing safety-related commands that were not initiated by an ATS user,
Incorrect information being displayed by the CBTC system to the ATS user。
The hazard analyses shall give due consideration of the specific transit application and whether the trains are
operated with Or without crews.
Control action confirmation shall be provided for any safety-related user interfaceslinputs and functions
whose inadvertent implementation could have an adverse operational impact, as defined by the authority
having jurisdiction。
6.3.3 CBTC train identification and train tracking
Each CBTC-equipped train operating within CBTC territory shall be assigned
a train identification。
This
train identification shall indicate the type of train and other pertinent information about the train。
An ATS system shall have the capability to automatically track, maintain records Of, and display on the ATS
uSer interface the locations,
identities, train schedule, and other pertinent data for all CBTC-equipped trains
operating in the CBTC territory。
The front and rear position Of trains shall be tracked based on CBTC train
location reports, and the train location shall be displayed on the ATS user interface. Variations i train
length may be displayed either proportionally or as
standard Iength icon supplemented by textual train
length data。
6.3.4 Train routing
An ATS system shall
the capability to permit CBTC-equipped trains operating in CBTC territory to be
manually and automatically routed based on CBTC train location reports and in accordance with the train
service data, predefined routing rules, and any ATS user-directed service strategy。
Where
applicable
to thC
specific track configuration, automatic routing shall facilitate the proper merging and diverging Of trains at
junctions; turn back of trains, the movement Of trains fromlto storage areas, and the rerouting Of trains i
response to service disruptions andlor planned outages. Train routes shall be indicated on the ATS user
interface and may also be indicated to the train operator andlor conductor, 让 present, on their displays, as
specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
An AIS system may also iclude a means to control and limit movement authorities Of
CBTC-equipped
trains operating in CBTC territory. CBTC movement authority limits shall be capable of being displayed on
the ATS user interface, and any uncommanded reductions Of authority limits shall be alarmed。
For trains
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
25
have

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
operated with crews, movement authority limits may also be indicated to the train operator andlor conductor
on their displays, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
6.3.5 Automatic train regulation
6.3.5.1 Schedulelheadway regulation
An ATS system may have the capability to automatically monitor and regulate the performance Of CBTC-
equipped trains operating in CBTC territory, in relation to schedule andlor headway adherence.
An
ATS system may include an automatic dispatching function (based on train identities; CBTC train
location reports, scheduled and actual headways between trains, and service strategies implemented by
authorized ATS users)_
Schedule and headway regulation for CBTC-equipped trains shall be by means Of dwell time variance
(including train holds) and may also be by control Of run times between stations
through adjustments
to train acceleration and service brake rates, and speeds), as specified by the authority having jurisdiction。
For trains operated with crews, the desired station departure time and desired speed profile between stations
may be indicated to the train operator andlor conductor on their displays and, when operating in ATO mode,
shall be implemented automatically by
CBTC systen using the automatic
regulation function Of
6.2.1.
An ATS system may provide the capability to adjust the train service
braking profiles for CBTC-equipped
trains (e.8,
证
Iesponse to
wet rail conditions)。
CBTC
shall coordinate iplementation of
requested changes i service braking profiles to avoid conditions that would result in an emergency brake
application。
6.3.5.2 Junction management
An ATS system may include automatic train
regulation functions, based on CBTC train location reports, to
facilitate
appropriate train meets (such as transfers between local and express tracks, and at the merge point
between different lines) in order to minimize overall system delays。
6.3.5.3 Energy optimization
An ATS system may have the capability to implement energy optimization algorithms for CBTC-equipped
tains through the real-time control and coordination Of train acceleration, train coasting, and train braking:
The priority given to energy optimization versus schedulelheadway regulation shall be as specified by the
authority having jurisdiction。
6.3.6 Station stop functions
6.3.6.1 Stop train at next station
An
AIS system
may include the
means to direct
single CBTC-equipped train or
a grouP Of CBTC-
equipped trains to stop at the next station, even i the train is scheduled to bypass that station_
For trains
operated with crews, a CBTC system may indicate the ATS train stop information to the train operator and
Conductor
on their displays。 皿
ATO mode,
CBTC-equipped train shall automatically stop at the next
station
6.3.6.2 Hold train at station
For trains operated without crews, an ATS system shall include facilities to hold (and subsequently release)
CBTC-equipped train at a station
26
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。
(e.8,
speed
System

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
For trains operated with crews, this function is optional and shall be as specified by the authority having
jurisdiction. If this function is provided, a CBTC system may indicate the train hold information to the train
operator and conductor on their displays, and/or prevent a CBTC-equipped train
departing the station
证 ATO node
6.3.6.3 Skip station stop
An ATS system may include facilities to direct a CBTC-equipped train or group Of CBTC-equipped trains to
pass through a station Or group Of stations without stopping. For trains operated with crews, a CBTC system
may indicate the skp station iformation to the train operator and conductor on their
displays. In ATO
mode, the train shall automatically skip the designated stations_
6.3.6.4 Door control inhibit
An ATS
may include facilities to inhibit (and subsequently permit) CBTC controlof the train doors
i accordance with 6.2.3
6.3.7
Restricting train operations
The
application and removal of the following functions can potentially introduce system hazards and the
specific implementation of these functions shall be considered in the hazard analyses required by 5.3.2_
6.3.7.1 Stopping atrain en route
An ATS system shall provide
8 Ieahs to stoP
single CBTC-equipped train or group Of CBTC-equipped
trains immediately。
A CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake application on the designated trains
and notify the train operator and conductor, ifpresent, via their displays。
6.3.7.2
Temporary
restrictions
An ATS system shall include facilities to impose (and remove) temporary
restrictions for CBTC
equipped trains operating On any section Oftrack in CBTC territory (see 6.1.3 ).
6.3.7.3 Switchltrack
blocking
An ATS system shall include facilities to block (and subsequently unblock) a switch, an exit signal
a Ioute
entry point, or
a section Of track within CBTC territory。
A
CBTC system shall prohibit CBTC-equipped
trains from
receiving movement authorities over blocked switches not aligned in the required position Or
into routes andlor sections of track that have been blocked (see 6.1.2 and 6.1.3).
6.3.7.4 Work zones
An ATS systen shall include facilities to establish (and subsequently remove) temporary work zones for the
protection Of work crews and work trains_
CBTC system shall enforce restricted speeds on approach to and through defined work zones (see 6.1.13 ).
For trains operated with crews, information indicating that the restriction is due to a work zone shall be dis-
played to the train operator and conductor on their
displays, and the CBTC system may preclude ATO mode
Ofoperation through a WoIk zone_
An ATS system may also provide methods Of visually and audibly indicating the approach and direction Of
trains
the wayside to warn On-track roadway workers in areas where visibility is restricted.
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
27
fron
System
speed
Speed
along

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
6.3.8 Passenger information system interfaces
An
ATS system may interface with wayside andlor train-borne passenger information systems to trigger
automatic passenger information messages; such as train arrival information, based on CBTC train location
reports_
Train-borne passenger information system interfaces shall be in accordance with IEE Std 1477-
1998.
6.3.9 Fault reporting
6.3.9.1 CBTC fault reporting
Failures and out-of-tolerance conditions detected by, or input to, a CBTC system that can impact the on-time
performance Of the transit system Or result in some other loss Of specific CBTC functionality may be auto-
matically indicated on the ATS user interface display。
alarms shall be categorized and prioritized into
critical and noncritical alarms and logged. All critical alarms shall require acknowledgment。
6.3.9.2 Train fault reporting
Train-borne CBTC equipment may include interfaces to train-borne subsystens for the purposes Of commu-
nicating train health data to the wayside for display on the ATS user interface displays, as specified by the
authority having jurisdiction。
6.4 Interoperability interface requirements
This performance and functional requirements standard does not include interface design standards for
interoperability。
Where interoperability requirements are specified by the authority having jurisdiction, i
shall be the responsibility of that authority to define the required interoperability interface standards_
NOTE
Examples of interoperability requirements include the following:
Trains
equipped with CBTC equipment furnished by one
to be capable of operating in CBTC territory
equipped with
CBTC equipment furished by another
Wayside equipment furnished by two separate suppliers to communicate with each other in the overlap area and
with common central ATS equipment
basic operating unit with train-borne CBTC equipment furnished by one
to be
capable of operating
within
a train with another basic operating unit equipped with train-borne CBTC equipment furnished by
another
supplier
future CBTC standard may establish interoperability interface requirements
28
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。
Any
supplier
wayside
supplier
supplier

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
Annex A
(informative)
Bibliography
81] American Public Transit Association
$ Manual for the Development of Rail Transit System Safety Pro-
gram Plans, APTA Rail Safety Audit Program June 1, 1989。
[82] AREMA Communications & Signals Manualof Recommended Practices, 2004
Section 2, Railway Signal Systems
Section 3.1.10
Recommended FunctionallOperational Guidelines
for
Interconnection
Between
Highway Traffic Signals and Highway-Rail Grade Crossing Warning Systems
Section 16, Vital Circuit and Software Design
Section 17.1.1 , Definition of Terms Used in the Manual Parts j Section 17
Section 17.3.1, Recommended
Assurance Program for Electronic/Software-Based Products
Used in Vital Signal Applications
Section 17.3.3, Recommended Practice for Hardware Analysis for Vital Electronic/Software-Based
Equipment Used in Signal and Train Control Applications
Section 17.3.5, Recommended Procedure for Hazard Identification and Management of Vital Elec-
tronic/Software-Based Equipment Used in Signal and Train Control Applications
83] ASCE 21-96 (Rev 1997), Automated People Mover Standards-
Part 1 . 8
[84] IEEE 100, The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms, Seventh Edition。
AREMA publications are available from the American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association, 8201 Corporate
Drive, Suite 1125, Landover, MD 20785-2230 USA
(WWW.aremna.orgl).
ASCE standards are available from the American Society of Civil Engineers, 1015 1Sth Street NW , Suite 600, Washington DC 20005
USA
WWW.aSCe.Org )
OIEEE publications are available fron the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway; NJ 08854
USA (http:llstandards.ieee.orgl_
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
29
Safety

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
Annex B
(informative)
Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system
ATS SYSTEN
INTERLOCKING
CBTC HAYSDDE
IEIGHBORING
EQUIPMENI
CBTC IVA YSIDE
EQUIPMENT
'To neighboring iterlockings
DATA COMNIUNICATIONS NETWORK
TRAINBORNE
TRAIN
CBTC
OPERATOR
EQUIPNIPNI
CONTROLS
TRAIN SUBSYSTENS
Figure B.1-Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system
30
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved。

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
Annex C
(informative)
Typical CBTC parameters
Table C.1 provides typical ranges for certain CBTC parameters for general guidance only. Parameter values
for a
specific application andlor a specific CBTC system design should be established by the authority hav-
ing jurisdiction andlor the supplier, with due consideration of all relevant factors for the specific application。
Table C.1-Typical CBTC parameters
Parameter
Typical range
Maximum number of trains that can be processed by
single wayside controller
10 to 40 trains
Resolution of measured train location (i.e., as reported to establish movement
士0.25 I to士6.25 n
authority limits for a following train for ATP purposes)
(士10i to 士20f)
Accuracy Of measured train location during normal (non-degraded) operations
士5I to 士101
(i.e., maximum error in reported train location for ATP purposes)
(士16 f to 士33 [)
Accuracy Of measured train location for programmed station stop (ATO)
士0.25 I
10j)
purposes
Without platform edge doors
Accuracy Of measured train location for programmed station stop (ATO)
士0.05 n (士2j)
purposes
with platform
doors
Resolution oftrain movement authority limits
士0.25 n to 士6.25n
(士10i to 士20f)
Resolution of train speed measurement for ATP purposes
士0.5 kmlh to 士 2 kmlh
(士0.3 milh to 士 1.25 milh)
Accuracy Of train speed measurement for ATP purposes
士3 kmlh (士2 nilh)
Resolution of train speed commands
civil speed limits)
+0.5 kmlh to 士 5 kmlh
(士0.3 milh to 士3 milh)
Train-to-wayside message communication delays
0.5 $ to 2 $ (nominal)
Wayside-to-train message commulication
0.5 $ to 2 $ (nominal)
Wayside CBTC equipment reaction times
0.07 s to 1 s (nominal)
Train-borne CBTC equipment reaction times
0.07 s to 0.75 $ (nominal)
Rollback detection criteria
0.5 m to 2 n (士20 i to 士6.5[)
Zero speed detection criteria
km/h to <3 kmlh for 2 s
(<0.6 nilh to < 2 milh for 2 $)
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
31
edge
(e.8,
delays

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
Annex D
(informative)
Typical safe braking model
0.1 Introduction
typical safe braking model for CBTC systems is illustrated in Figure D.1.
It should be noted that Figure D.1 is not drawn to scale, but is a simplistic representation to assist i the
understanding Of
typical CBTC safe braking model. It should also be noted that the safe braking model
outlined here is defined for level tangent track and would need to be adjusted for grades。
In Figure D.1, the emergency brake curve is the worst-case, open-一
speedldistance curve a train will fol-
low once the ATP has initiated an emergency brake application. This emergency brake curve must always
be less than or equal to the safe
Curve, Where safe
is defined as the speed above Which
Critical
hazard (derailment or collision) could ocCUI.
In this model, safety factors are accounted for in the emergency brake curve, train position uncertainties, and
other additional measurement tolerances incorporated in the CBTC system design, and there is no require-
ment to add additional safety margins_
The ATP
overspeed detection curve is the speed-distance curve that the ATP subsystem uses to immediately
initiate an emergency brake application, if the ATP subsystem detects that the measured speed exceeds this
Curve at thC measured train location
When the ATP subsystem has initiated an emergency brake application,
the
ATP subsystem is no longer in the control
and the train will emergency brake at Or below the
emergency brake curve. The emergency brake curve includes an iitial
propulsion runaway period, until
propulsion is disabled。
The ATP profile curve is the speed-distance curve that is an ATP overspeed allowance below the ATP over-
detection curve. The ATP profile is the base curve used by the ATP subsystem。
0.2 Trainborne CBTC response time (A)
In Figure D.1, it is assumed that the CBTC system will measure the train speed and train location (relative to
its movement authority limit) and compare the measure
with the ATP profile
at that Ieasurc
location, every A seconds (worst case)
In Figure D.1,
Xrepresents the situation where the CBTC measured speed is just below the ATP over-
speed detection curve at the ATP measure location,
although the ATP measured speed is above the ATP
profile, it is still within the ATP overspeed allowance. As such,
the CBTC system will not initiate emer-
gency braking:
However, because Of worst-case speed and location measurement errors (position uncertainty ), it is possible
that the actual speed and actual location Of the train could be a
Y
At this point in time, although the train operator andlor ATO subsystem would normally be attempting to
bring the train speed down to the ATP profile speed, it is assumed that
failure OCCUIS that results 边 the
train accelerating rather than braking:
32
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.AlI rights reserved。
IoOP,
speed
speed
IooP,
speed
speed
speed
point
ie,
point

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
seconds later, this situation will be detected by the CBTC system (point 乙 in Figure D.1), as the CBTC
measured speed will now clearly be " excess of the ATP overspeed detection curve, and the CBTC system
willimmediately initiate an open-loop emergency brake application。
The speed at point 乙 therefore represents the maximum speed that a train can achieve above the ATP profile
due to CBTC system s worst-case response times and measurement errors_
At this point, the remaining contributions to the safe braking model are determined by the vehicle character-
istics only
0.3 Propulsion disable response time (B)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled B in Figure D.1 ), the train continues to accelerate
until thc train
propulsion system has been disabled in response to the CBTC system initiating an emergency
brake application。
0.4 Coast time (C)
During this component ofthe safe braking model (labeled C in Figure D.1), the train is assumed to be coast-
ig at the maximum speed achieved as
result Of the train accelerating prior to propulsion being disabled。
This component of the safe braking model ends when emergency braking begins to take effect
0.5 Emergency brake build-up time (0)
During this component Of the safe braking model (labeled D in Figure D.1), the emergency brake rate will
build up fom zero to at least the GEBR。
D.6 Emergency braking at GEBR (E)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled E in Figure D.1 ), the train continues to decelerate
at the GEBR until the train comes to zero speed。
Note
The components D and E may be integrated into an equivalent single brake curve-
0.7 Position uncertainty
The safe braking model must include the maximuml distance due to measurement inaccuracy by the CBTC
system for both the leading and following train。
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
33

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)

-
&

嚣
兽

岛
鼍鼍
訾
_
n
矗
髻鼍
藿
壹
*
鼍
昙
_
8
嚣
嚣
%

髻
詈
詈
e
篱

甏
'


鼠
9
&
0
GGW

詈
`

豆
髓

总


t


义
合
岳
:
薹

台



薹
#
蒡
*
昙
SPEED
34
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.
All rights reserved.

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
Annex E
(normative)
System Safety Program requirements
E.1 System Safety Program Plan (SSPP)
E.1.1 Purpose
The SSPP shall describe, in detail, tasks and activities Of system safety management and system safety engi-
neering required to identify, evaluate, and eliminatelcontrol hazards or reduce the associated risk to
a level
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction throughout the system life
E.1.2 Description
An SSPP shall be developed to provide a basis of understanding as to
the System Safety Program will
be accomplished to meet safety requirements. The approved plan shall,
Oh an
item-by-item basis, account
for a11
required tasks and responsibilities。
The SSPP shall include the
following elements
E.1.2.1 Program scope and objectives
Each SSPP shall describe, as
minimum, the five elements of an effective System Safety Program: defini-
tion Of the safety tasks;
planned approach for task accomplishment, qualified people to accomplish tasks,
authority to implement tasks through all levels of management, and appropriate commitment Of resources
(both staffing and funding)
to assure tasks are completed_
The SSPP shall define a program to satisfy the
system safety requirements. This section shall
a)
Describe the scope of the overall program and the related System Safety Program_
b)
List
the
tasks
and
activities
Of system
safety
nanagement
and
engineering;
describe
the
interrelationships between system safety and other functional elements Of the program; list the other
program requirements and tasks applicable to system safety, and identify where
are
specified or
described.
Account for all contractually required safety tasks and responsibilities. A matrix shall be provided to
correlate requirements to the location in the SSPP where the requirement is addressed。
E.1.2.2 System safety organization
The SSPP shall describe the
following:
The system safety organization Or function within the organization of the total program using charts
to show the organizational and functional relationships and lines Of communication。
It shall also
show the organizational relationship between other functional elements having responsibility for
tasks with system safety impacts and the system safety management and engineering organization. It
shall identify the review and approval authority Of applicable tasks by system safety。
b)
The responsibility
and
authority Of system safety personnel;
Other
Contractor
organizational
elements involved i the system safety effort, subcontractors, and system safety groups. It shall
identify the methods by which safety personnel may raise issues Of concern directly to the program
manager
OI the Program
manager'$ Supervisor
within
the corporation;
the organizational
unit
responsible
for executing each
task,
and
the authority in regard
tO resolution Of all identified
hazards_
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
35
cycle:
how
they

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
The
staffing Of the system safety organization for the duration of the contract to include manpower
loading; control of resources, and
sumlary Of the qualifications Of
system safety personnel
assigned to the effort, including those Who possess coordinationlapproval authority for contractor
prepared documentation
The procedures by Which the contractor
will integrate and coordinate the systen safety efforts。
including assignment Of the system safety requirements to action organizations and subcontractors
coordination Of subcontractor System Safety Programs, integration Of hazard analyses, program and
design reviews, program status reporting, and system safety groups。
ThC
Process through
Which
contractor management decisions
will
be
made;
icluding timely
notification Of unacceptable risks, necessary action; incidents or malfunctions, waivers
t0
safety
requirements, Program deviations, etc.
Details of how resolution and action relative to system safety will be effected at the program
management level possessing resolution authority.
E.1.2.3 System Safety Program milestones
The SSPP shall
a)
Define System Safety Program milestones。
It shall relate
thesc
to major program milestones;
program element responsibility, and required inputs and outputs_
b)
Provide
program schedule Of safety tasks, including start and completion dates, reports, and
reviewS_
Identity subsystem, component, and software safety activities a5
well a8
integrated system level
activities (i.e., design analyses, tests, and demonstrations)
applicable
to the System Safety Program,
but
fied in other engineering studies and development efforts to preclude duplication。
Provide the estimated manpower loading required to complete each task。
E.1.2.4 General
system safety requirements and criteria
The SSPP shall describe the following:
General engineering requirements and design criteria for safety. It shall include safety requirements
for support equipment and operational safety requirements for allappropriate phases of the life
I
and
icluding; disposal. It shall list the safety standards and system specifications containing
safety requirements that shall be complied with, and include titles, dates, and where applicable;
Paragraph numbers。
b)
Risk assessment procedures。
It shall include the hazard severity categories, hazard probability
levels;, and the systen safety precedence that shall be followed to satisfy the safety requirements Of
the Progran
It shall state any qualitative Or quantitative measures Of safety to be used for risk
assessment,
including
description of the acceptablelunacceptable risk levels, and include system
safety definitions that modify, deviate from, Or are in addition to those in this standard。
Closed-loop procedures for taking action to resolve identified unacceptable risk, including those
involving nondevelopmental items。
E.1.2.5 Hazard analysis
The SSPP shall describe the following:
The analysis techniques and formats to be used in qualitative or quantitative analysis to identify
hazards, their causes and effects, hazard elimination, Or risk reduction requirements and how those
requirements are met。
b)
The depth within the system
t0
which each
technique is used, icluding hazard identification
associated
with
the system, subsystem, components, software。
hazardous  materials, personnel;
ground support equipment, nondevelopmental items, facilities and
their interrelationship 证 the
36
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE。
All rights reserved。
key
specif
Cycle
tO,

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
logistic support, training; maintenance, operational;
and disposal (including render
Safc
and
emergency disposal) environments_
The integration of subcontractor hazard analyses with overall system hazard analyses
Efforts to identify and control hazards associated with materials used
the system 's life
E.1.2.6 System safety data
The SSPP shall
Describe the approach for collecting and processing pertinent historical hazard data, mishap data,
and
safety lessons-learned data.
b
Identify deliverable data by title and number, and means Of delivery (e.8. , hard copy, electronically)。
Identify nondeliverable system safety data and describe the procedures for accessibility by the
authority having jurisdiction and retention Of data of historical value。
E.1.2.7 Safety verification
The SSPP shall describe the
following:
The verification (test, analysis, inspection, etc. ) requirements for ensuring that safety is adequately
demonstrated. It shall identify any certification requirements for software, safety devices, Or other
special safety features (e.8., render safe and emergency disposal procedures).
b
Procedures for
making sure safety-related verification information is transmitted to the authority
havingjurisdiction for review and analysis。
Procedure for ensuring the safe conduct Of all tests_
E.1.2.8 Audit program
The SSPP shall describe the techniques and procedures to be employed to make sure the objectives and
requirements Of the System Safety Program are being accomplished。
E.1.2.9 Training
ThC
SSPP
Shall
describe the safety training for engineering; technician operating;
and
maintenance
personnel。
E.1.2.10 Incident reporting
The contractor shall describe in the SSPP the mishaplincident alertinglnotification, investigation, and report-
process, including notification Of the authority having jurisdiction。
E.1.2.11 System Safety interfaces
The SSPP shallidentify, in detail, the following:
The interface between systen safety, systems engineering, and all other support disciplines, such as
maintainability, quality  control, reliability, software development, human
factors   engineering;
medical support (health hazard assessments), and any others
6)
The interface between system safety and all system integration and test disciplines
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
37
during
Cycle。
ing-

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
E.2
Preliminary hazard analysis (PHA)
E.2.1 Purpose
The PHA shall identify safety-critical areas, provide an initial assessment Of hazards, and identify requisite
hazard controls and follow-on actions
E.2.2 Description
PHA shall be performed and documented to obtain an initial risk assessment Of a concept Or system。
Based on the best available data,
icluding mishap data (i assessable) from similar systems and other les-
sons learned, hazards associated with the proposed design or function shall be evaluated for hazard severity,
hazard probability, and operational constraint. Safety provisions and alternatives needed to eliminate haz-
ards
OI reduce their associated risk to
a level
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction shall be
included. The PHA shall consider the following for identification and evaluation of hazards, as a minimum:
Hazardous components
fuels, propellants, lasers; toxic substances; hazardous construction
materials, pressure systems, and other energy sources)一
b)
Safety-related  interface
considerations  among
Various
Clcmcnts
Of the system
material
compatibilities, electromagnetic interference; inadvertent activation, firelexplosive initiation and
propagation, and hardware and software controls ). This shall include consideration of the potential
contribution by software (including sofiware developed by other contractors/sources) to subsysteml
system mishaps. Safety design criteria to control safety-critical software commands and responses
(e.8., inadvertent command, failure to command, untimely command
OI responses;
inappropriate
magnitude, or other designated undesired events) shall be identified and appropriate action taken to
incorporate them in the software (and related hardware) specifications。
Environmental constraints; including the operating environments (e.8,
shock。
vibration
extreme   temperatures; noise; exposure
to
toxic
Substances,
health hazards,
Clectrostatic
discharge, lightning, electromagnetic environmentaleffects)。
Operating; test maintenance, built-in-tests, diagnostics, and emergency procedures (e.8.一
human
factors engineering; human error analysis of operator functions, tasks, and requirements; effect of
factors, such
38
equipment layout, lighting requirements, potential exposures to toxic materials;
effects Of noise or radiation on human performance). Those test-unique hazards that will be a direct
result ofthe test and evaluation of the article or vehicle。
Facilities, real property installed equipment, support
equipment
provisions
for storage。
assembly,
checkout, proofltesting
Of
hazardous   systemslassemblies
that
Iay
ivolve  toxic;
flammable,
explosive; corrosive;
OI
cryogenic
mlaterials/wastes;
radiation
OI
Ioise
emitters;
electrical power sources), and training (e.8., training and certification pertaining to safety operations
and maintenance)
Safety-related equipment, safeguards, and possible alternate approaches (e.8., interlocks; system
redundancy;
fail-safe  design
considerations  using
hardware
OI
software
controls;
subsystem
protection;
frc
detection
and
suppression
SyStens;
personal protective equipment; heating。
ventilation, and air-conditioning; and noise or radiation barriers).
8)
Malfunctions to the system; subsystems,
OI Software。
Each malfunction shall be specified;
the
causing and resulting sequence
of
events
determined,
the
degree Of hazard
determined, and
appropriate specification and /or design changes developed。
38
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.
(e.8:
(e.8,
drop;
fire,
(e.8,

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
E.3 Subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA)
E.3.1 Purpose
The SSHA shall verify subsystem compliance with safety requirements contained i subsystem specifica-
tions and other applicable documents; identify previously unidentified hazards associated with the design of
subsystems, including component failure modes, critical human
error inputs, and hazards resulting from
functional relationships between
components
and equipment comprising each
subsystem;
recommend
actions necessary to eliminate identified hazards or control their associated risk to acceptable levels。
E.3.2 Description
An SSHA shall be performed and documented to identify all components and equipment that could result in
hazard or whose design does not satisfy safety requirements. Areas to consider are performance, perfor-
IanCC
degradation, functional failures,
errors, design errors Or defects, Or inadvertent
functioning:
The human shall be considered
component within
subsystem, receiving both inputs and initiating out-
puts, during the conduct of this analysis。
The analysis shall include a determination
3 )
Of the modes Of failure; including reasonable human errors aS
95
single-point and common-
mode failures, and the effects onl safety when failures occUr in subsysten components。
b)
Of potential contribution of hardware and software (icluding that which is developed by other
contractorslsources) events, faults, and occurrences (such as improper timing) On the safety Of the
subsystem。
That the safety design criteria in the hardware; software, and facilities specification(s) have been
Satisfied.
That the method of implementation of hardware, software, and facilities design requirements and
corrective actions has not impaired or decreased the safety Of the subsystem nor has i introduced
Iew hazards Orrisks。
Ofthe implementation Of safety design requirements from top level specifications to detailed design
specifications for the subsystem。
The implementation Of safety design requirements developed as
part of the PHA shall be analyzed to ensure that i satisfies the intent Of the requirements.
Of test plan and procedure recommendations to integrated safety testing into the hardware and
software test Programs。
That system level hazards attributed to the subsystem are analyzed and that adequate control of the
potential hazard is inplemented in the design。
When software to be used in conjunction with the subsystem is being developed, the contractor performing
the SSHA shall monitor, obtain, and use the output Of each phase Of the formal software development Pro-
CeSS 证
evaluating the software contribution to the SSHA.
The SSHA shall be updated as
a result Of any system design
changes, including software design changes;
that affect system safety。
E.4 System hazard analysis (SHA)
E.4.1 Purpose
The SHA shall
3)
Verify
compliance with safety requirements contained in system specifications and other
applicable documents_
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
39
timing
well
any
System

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
b)
Identify previously unidentified
hazards
associated
with
the subsystem
interfaces
and system
functional faults
Assess the risk associated with the total system design, including software, and specifically Of the
subsystem interfaces。
Recommend actions necessary to climinate identified hazards and/or control their associated risk to
acceptable levels_
E.4.2 Description
An SHA shall be performed and documented to identify hazards and assess the risk Of the total system
design, including software, and specifically Of the subsysten interfaces.
This analysis shallinclude a review Of subsystem interrelationships for the following:
3)
Compliance with specified safety design criteria
b)
Possible independent, dependent, and simultaneous hazardous events including systems failures;
failures of safety devices; common
cause failures and events; and system interactions that could
Create a hazard OI result in an increasc j
mishap risk
Degradation in the safety Of
subsystem Or the total system from normal operation Of another
subsystem
Design changes that affect subsystems
Effects ofreasonable human errors
#
Determination
1)
Ofpotential contribution of hardware and software (including that which is developed by other
contractors/sources,
Or commercial
Off-the-shelf hardware
OI
software) events, faults, and
Occurrelces (such aS
iproper timing)
011
safety Ofthe system。
2)
That the safety design criteria in the hardware, software, and facilities specification(s) Iave
been satisfied。
3)
That the method of implementation of the hardware, software, and facilities design require-
ments and corrective actions has not impaired or degraded the safety Of the system nor has i
introduced any new hazards
The SHA may be combined with andlor performed using similar techniques to those used for the SSHA.
When software to be used i conjunction with the
is being developed, the contractor performing the
SHA shall monitor, obtain, and use the output Of each phase of the formal software development process i
evaluating the software contribution to the SHA.
The SHA shall be updated as a result Of any system design changes including software design changes that
affect system safety。
E.5 Operating and support hazard analysis (O&SHA)
E.5.1 Purpose
The O&SHA shall evaluate activities for hazards or risks introduced into the systen by operational and SUP-
port procedures and evaluate adequacy Of operational and support procedures used to eliminate, control, Or
abate identified hazards or risks
40
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.
System

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
E.5.2 Description
An O&SHA shall be performed and documented to examine procedurally controlled activities. The O&SHA
identifies and evaluates hazards resulting
the
following:
The implementation of operations or tasks
performed by persons, considering the planned system
configurationlstate at each phase Of activity
The
facility interfaces; the planned environments (or ranges thereof)
'The supporting tools or other equipment;
icluding software controlled automatic test equipment;
specified for use; operationalltask sequence, concurrent task effects and limitations
The potential for unplanned events, including hazards introduced by human elrors
The human shall be considered an element Of the total system, receiving both inputs and initiating outputs
during the conduct of this analysis。
The O&SHA
Iust
identify the safety requirements (or alternatives)
needed to eliminate or control identified hazards or to reduce the associated risk to a level that is acceptable
under either regulatory Or contractually specified criteria。
The analysis shall identify the following:
41
Activities that occUT under hazardous conditions, their time periods, and the actions required to
minimize Iisk
these activities/time
periods
b)
Changes needed i
functional
OI
design requirements for system hardwarelsoftware, facilities,
tooling, or supportltest equipment to eliminate Or control hazards or reduce associated risks
Requirements  for safety devices and
equipment, including personnel safety and life support
equipment
Warnings, cautions, and special emergency procedures, including those necessitated by failure Ofa
computer software-controlled
operation;
to  produce
the expected
and
required safe
result
Or
indication
Requirements
for packaging; handling; storage。
transportation;
maintenance,
and disposal
Of
hazardous materials
Requirements for safety training and personnel certification
8)
Effects
Of nondevelopmental
hardware
and
SOftwarc
aCrOSS
the
interfacC
with
other system
components or subsystems
h)
Potentially hazardous systen states under operator control
The O&SHA shall document system safety assessment Of procedures ivolved in system production;
deployment, istallation, assembly, test, operation, maintenance, servicing; transportation, storage, modifi-
cation, and disposal。
The contractor shall update the O&SHA as a result Ofany system design or operational changes。
E.6 Risk assessment
The hazard resolution process shall be initiated by defining the physical and functional characteristics Of the
system to be analyzed
These characteristics shall be presented in terms of the major elements that make UP
the system and its environment, including equipment, facilities, procedures, and people.
The hazards shall be identified. The techniques and methods used to identify the hazards shall include the
following:
Data from previous accidents or operating experience
b)
Expert opinion and hazard scenarios
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved
41
fron
during

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
EEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
Checklists of potential hazards
Previous hazard analyses
Other analysis techniques as appropriate
Allidentified hazards shall be assessed in terms Of the severity Or consequence of the hazard and the proba-
bility Of occurrence.
Risk assessment estimates (see Table E.1) shall be used as the basis in the decision-making process to deter-
mine whether individual system or subsystem hazards shall be eliminated, mitigated, or accepted. Hazards
shall be resolved through a design process that emphasizes the elimination of the hazard. Resolution strate-
gies or countermeasures to be employed, listed in order Of decreasing preference, shall be the following:
1)
Design to eliminate hazards
2)
Design to control hazards
3)
UsC
safety devices
4)
Use warning devices
5)
Implement special procedures
Accept the hazard
Eliminate the system/subsystemlequipment
This Process shall include full documentation of the hazard resolution activities. The effectiveness Of the
countermeasures shall be monitored to determine that no new hazards are introduced. In addition, whenever
substantive
changes are made to the system, analyses shall be conducted to identify and resolve any new
hazards_
Table E.1 provides an example Of the relationship between risk, severity, and probability as i may be
When assessing CBTC systems_
The authority having jurisdiction may choose to modify this table to
reflect existing procedures or requirements。
Table E.1-Risk assessment
Hazard severity
Frequency of
1
Catastrophic
Critical
3-Marginal
4-Negligible
ocCurrence
Frequent
Unacceptable (1A)
Unacceptable (2A)
Unacceptable (3A)
Undesirable (4A)
B
Probable
Unacceptable (18)
Unacceptable (2B)
Undesirable (3B)
Acceptable with
review (4B)
Occasional
Unacceptable (1C)
Unacceptable (2C)
Acceptable with
Acceptable with
review (3C)
review (4C)
Remote
Unacceptable (ID)
Unacceptable (2D)
Acceptable with
Acceptable without
review (3D)
review (4D)
Improbable
Undesirable ( 1E)
Undesirable (2})
Acceptable without
Acceptable without
review (3卫)
review (4E)
42
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.All rights reserved.
applied

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
Residualrisk levels
Unacceptable (1AIBICID, 2A/BICID, and 3A)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered unacceptable; hazards must be
mitigated through fail-safe designs。
Undesirable (1E,2E,38, and 4A)
CBTC systems
with residual risks rated
at this level are considered undesirable; depending On
economic and functional requirements, CBTC systems with hazards rated at this risk level may be
considered acceptable with explicit agreement from the authority having jurisdiction。
Acceptable with review (3C/D and 4B/C)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered acceptable with review; depend-
ig on economic and functional requirements, CBTC systems with hazards rated at this risk level
be considered acceptable with notification to the authority having jurisdiction。
Acceptable without review (3卫 and 4D/E)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered acceptable without review; addi-
tional design effort or system revision is not required to reduce the severity or probability of hazards
with this risk level。
Frequency ofoccurrence
~Frequent
Likely to occur frequently; MTBHE is less than 1000 operating hours。
B
Probable
Willoccur several times in the life of an item; MTBHE is equal to or greater than
1000 operating hours and less than 100 000 operating hours_
Occasional
Likely to occur some time i the life Of an item; MTBHE is equal to or greater
than 100 000 operating hours and less than 10 000 000 operating hours
Remote
Unlikely, but possible to
OccUI i the life Of an item; MTBHE is equal to
Or
greater than 10 O00 O00 operating hours and less than
1 000 O00 000 operating
hours。
Improbable
So unlikely, i can be assumed occurrence may not be experienced; MTBHE is
equalto or greater than 1 000 O00 000 operating hours_
Hazard severity
Catastrophic
Fatality, system
Or Severc Cnvironmental
damage。
2一
Critical
Severe injury,
Severe
occupational illness; major system
OI
Cnvironmental
damage。
3-
Marginal
Minor injury, minor occupational illness,
OI
minor System
Or environmcntal
damage。
Negligible
Less than minor injury, occupational illness, or less than minor system Or envi-
ronmental damage。
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved.
43
may
IosS,

IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004
IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
Annex F
(informative)
Typical approaches to specifying CBTC system availability
F.1 Traditional equipment-based approach
The traditional approach to defining system availability is the probability that the system is capable Of oper-
ating and performing its intended function at a random
i time, as determined by the system MTBFE
and MTTRS, as shown i Equation (F.1):
CBTC system availability
system MTBFE
(system MTBFF + system MTTRS)
(F.1)
Where
System MTTRS is the sum Of the system MTTR and the mean travel times for maintenance personnel to
travel to the site Of a failure_
With this approach, the authority having jurisdiction would typically specify the following:
41
ThC
quantitative CBTC system availability requirements
b)
The average travel times to be assumed for maintenance personnel to travel to the site Of a failure
The boundaries of the CBTC system covered by the availability requirement
The type of CBTC failures to be included in defining the system MTBFE
For a
given CBTC system configuration, the predicted CBTC system availability could be determined ana-
Iytically fron estimates Of subsystem MTBFFs and MTTRs.
Actual CBTC system availability could
be determined from
measurements Of actual
in-service system
MTBFF and MTTRS, with appropriate adjustments for factors that are not included within the specified
boundaries of the CBTC system。
F.2 Alternative delayed trip-based approach
An alternative approach is to define CBTC system availability in terms Of the system
contributions to thC
desired on-time performance of the transit system, as shown in Equation (F.2):
Sw
Revenue trips delayed more than
tx
by CBTC Type failure
CBTC system availability
(F.2)
Total scheduled revenue trips
Where
Revenue trip is a scheduled movement ofa train, of defined length, from
Oforigin to a destination,
t is a defined
delay threshold,
Wr is a weighting factor associated with that delay threshold.
With
this   approach。
CBTC system availability
would
takC
Into
aCCOult
the delays experienced
by
Passengers
As the passenger judges transit system availability on the basis Of the wait and travel time
variations Of the service Provided, CBTC system failures that result i
delays are penalized with
44
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE.All rights reserved.
point
point
longer

IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Std 1474.1-2004
greater weighting factor than failures that result i shorter delays. In general, delay thresholds would be
related
to
the operating headways。
35
delays at shorter headways impact on-time performance
Iore
significantly。
Ihe CBTC system availability requirement may also consider other failure types, to the extent that such
failures impact fleet availability。
For example;
eVen 让
train-borne CBTC equipment failure does not
immediately impact the on-time performance Of the transit system; i may subsequently result in missed
revenue trips if the failure repair time results in the train being unavailable for service.
With this approach, the authority having jurisdiction would typically specify the following:
The
quantitative CBTC system availability requirements
b)
Ihe various delay thresholds and weighting factors
The average travel times to be assumed for maintenance personnel to travel to the site ofa failure
The boundaries of the CBTC system covered by the availability requirements
Ihe type Of CBTC failures to be included in defining the system availability
For
given CBTC system configuration the predicted CBTC system availability could be determined
through computer modeling from estimates Of subsystem
MTBFFs and MTTRs, and
an assumed system
operating plan。
Actual CBTC system availability could be determined firom measurements Of actual in-service delays, with
appropriate adjustments for factors that are
not included within the
specified boundaries of the CBIC
system。
Copyright @ 2005 IEEE
All rights reserved
45