IEEE Std 1474.1 ™-2004
(Revision of
IEEE Std 1474.1-1999)IEEE Standards1474.1TM
IEEE Standard for Communications-
Based Train Control (CBTC)Performance and FunctionalRequirements
3 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5997, USAIEEE Vehicular Technology Society
Sponsored by the
Rail Transit Vehicle Interface Standards CommitteeIEEE Standards
25 February 2005
Print:  SH95275
PDF:  SS95275
 
Recognized as an
American National Standard (ANSI) 
IEEE Std 1474.1 
™ 
-2004 
(Revision of
IEEE Std 1474.1-1999) 
IEEE Standard for Communications-
Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements 
Sponsor 
Rail Transit Vehicle Interface Standards Committee 
of the 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Society 
Approved 2 February 2005 
American National Standards Institute 
Approved 23 September 2004 
IEEE-SA Standards Board
 
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.
3 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5997, USA
Copyright © 2005 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.
All rights reserved. Published 25 February 2005. Printed in the United States of America.
IEEE is a registered trademark in the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office, owned by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Incorporated.
Print: ISBN 0-7381-4486-X SH95275
PDF: ISBN 0-7381-4487-8 SS95275 
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form, in an electronic retrieval system or otherwise, without the priorwritten permission of the publisher. 
Abstract: 
 Performance and functional requirements for a communications-based train control
(CBTC) system are established in this standard. A CBTC system is a continuous, automatic train
control system utilizing high-resolution train location determination, independent of track circuits;continuous, high-capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside data communications; and train-borne andwayside processors capable of implementing automatic train protection (ATP) functions, as well asoptional automatic train operation (ATO) and automatic train supervision (ATS) functions. Inaddition to CBTC functional requirements, this standard also defines headway criteria, systemsafety criteria, and system availability criteria for a CBTC system. This standard is applicable to thefull range of transit applications including automated people movers. 
Keywords:  
automation, communications, signaling, train control
 
IEEE Standards 
 documents are developed within the IEEE Societies and the Standards Coordinating
Committees of the IEEE Standards Association (IEEE-SA) Standards Board. The IEEE develops its standards
through a consensus development process, approved by the American National Standards Institute, which bringstogether volunteers representing varied viewpoints and interests to achieve the final product. Volunteers are notnecessarily members of the Institute and serve without compensation. While the IEEE administers the processand establishes rules to promote fairness in the consensus development process, the IEEE does not independentlyevaluate, test, or verify the accuracy of any of the information contained in its standards.
Use of an IEEE Standard is wholly voluntary. The IEEE disclaims liability for any personal injury, property or
other damage, of any nature whatsoever, whether special, indirect, consequential, or compensatory, directly orindirectly resulting from the publication, use of, or reliance upon this, or any other IEEE Standard document.
The IEEE does not warrant or represent the accuracy or content of the material contained herein, and expressly
disclaims any express or implied warranty, including any implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a spe-cific purpose, or that the use of the material contained herein is free from patent infringement. IEEE Standardsdocuments are supplied “ 
AS IS 
.”
The existence of an IEEE Standard does not imply that there are no other ways to produce, test, measure, pur-chase, market, or provide other goods and services related to the scope of the IEEE Standard. Furthermore, theviewpoint expressed at the time a standard is approved and issued is subject to change brought about throughdevelopments in the state of the art and comments received from users of the standard. Every IEEE Standard issubjected to review at least every five years for revision or reaffirmation. When a document is more than fiveyears old and has not been reaffirmed, it is reasonable to conclude that its contents, although still of some value,do not wholly reflect the present state of the art. Users are cautioned to check to determine that they have the lat-est edition of any IEEE Standard.
In publishing and making this document available, the IEEE is not suggesting or rendering professional or other
services for, or on behalf of, any person or entity. Nor is the IEEE undertaking to perform any duty owed by anyother person or entity to another. Any person utilizing this, and any other IEEE Standards document, should relyupon the advice of a competent professional in determining the exercise of reasonable care in any givencircumstances. 
I 
nterpretations: Occasionally questions may arise regarding the meaning of portions of standards as they relate to
specific applications. When the need for interpretations is brought to the attention of IEEE, the Institute will initiateaction to prepare appropriate responses. Since IEEE Standards represent a consensus of concerned interests, it isimportant to ensure that any interpretation has also received the concurrence of a balance of interests. For thisreason, IEEE and the members of its societies and Standards Coordinating Committees are not able to provide an
instant response to interpretation requests except in those cases where the matter has previously received formal
consideration. At lectures, symposia, seminars, or educational courses, an individual presenting information onIEEE standards shall make it clear that his or her views should be considered the personal views of that individualrather than the formal position, explanation, or interpretation of the IEEE. 
Comments for revision of IEEE Standards are welcome from any interested party, regardless of membership
affiliation with IEEE. Suggestions for changes in documents should be in the form of a proposed change of text,together with appropriate supporting comments. Comments on standards and requests for interpretations shouldbe addressed to: 
Secretary, IEEE-SA Standards Board
445 Hoes Lane
Piscataway, NJ 08854
USA 
Authorization to photocopy portions of any individual standard for internal or personal use is granted by the Insti-
tute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., provided that the appropriate fee is paid to Copyright ClearanceCenter. To arrange for payment of licensing fee, please contact Copyright Clearance Center, Customer Service,222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923 USA; +1 978 750 8400. Permission to photocopy portions of anyindividual standard for educational classroom use can also be obtained through the Copyright Clearance Center.NOTE−Attention is called to the possibility that implementation of this standard may require use of subject
matter covered by patent rights. By publication of this standard, no position is taken with respect to the
existence or validity of any patent rights in connection therewith. The IEEE shall not be responsible foridentifying patents for which a license may be required by an IEEE standard or for conducting inquiries into thelegal validity or scope of those patents that are brought to its attention.
 
iv 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
Introduction 
This introduction provides some background on the rationale used to develop this standard. This information
is meant to aid in the understanding, usage, and applicability of this standard.
Conventional signaling/train control systems rely almost exclusively on track circuits to detect the presence
of trains. Information on the status of the track ahead is provided to train operators either through waysidesignals or train-borne cab signals. Ensuring compliance with the signals is achieved through operatingprocedures, wayside automatic train stops, or train-borne supervisory equipment linked to the train’s brakingsystem. These conventional systems are effective in providing train protection, but are not particularlyefficient in maximizing the utilization of the rail transit infrastructure, as a result of a number of fundamentallimitations, specifically, the following:
a) The location of trains can only be determined to the resolution of the track circuits; if any part of a
track circuit is occupied by a train, the whole track circuit must be assumed to be occupied by thetrain. Track circuits can be made shorter, but each additional track circuit requires additional way-side hardware, so there is an economical and practical limit to the number of track circuits that canbe provided.
b) The information that can be provided to a train is limited to a small number of wayside signal
aspects or a small number of speed codes in a cab signal system.
c) For a wayside signal system with automatic train stops but without continuous cab signaling,
enforcement is intermittent.
CBTC systems overcome these fundamental limitations of conventional track circuit-based systems, andtherefore, permit more effective utilization of the transit infrastructure. This is accomplished, for example,by allowing trains to operate safely at much closer headways, by permitting greater flexibility and greaterprecision in train control, and by providing continuous safe train separation assurance and overspeed protec-tion. Additional benefits of CBTC technology include the economical support of automatic train operations(both on the mainline and in maintenance yards), improved reliability, and reductions in maintenance coststhrough a reduction in wayside equipment and real-time diagnostic information. The basic characteristics ofa CBTC system include the following:
1) Determination of train location, to a high degree of precision, independent of track circuits. 
2) A geographically continuous train-to-wayside and wayside-to-train data communications network to
permit the transfer of significantly more control and status information than is possible with conven-
tional systems. 
3) Wayside and train-borne vital processors to process the train status and control data and provide
continuous automatic train protection (ATP). Automatic train operation (ATO) and automatic train
supervision (ATS) functions can also be provided, as required by the particular application.
Although the benefits of CBTC technology are recognized, there are currently no independent standards
defining the performance and functional requirements that need to be satisfied by CBTC systems in order torealize enhanced performance, availability, train operational flexibility, and train protection. This standardhas been developed to address this. [This introduction is not part of IEEE Std 1474.1-2004, IEEE Standard for Communications-Based Train Control
(CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements.]
 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
v 
Notice to users 
Errata 
Errata, if any, for this and all other standards can be accessed at the following URL: http://
standards.ieee.org/reading/ieee/updates/errata/index.html . Users are encouraged to check this URL for
errata periodically. 
Interpretations 
Current interpretations can be accessed at the following URL: http://standards.ieee.org/reading/ieee/interp/
index.html . 
Patents 
Attention is called to the possibility that implementation of this standard may require use of subject matter
covered by patent rights. By publication of this standard, no position is taken with respect to the existence or
validity of any patent rights in connection therewith. The IEEE shall not be responsible for identifyingpatents or patent applications for which a license may be required to implement an IEEE standard or forconducting inquiries into the legal validity or scope of those patents that are brought to its attention. 
Participants 
At the time this standard was completed, the Communications-Based Train Control Working Group had the
following membership: 
Alan F. Rumsey, 
  
Chair 
The following members of the individual balloting committee voted on this standard. Balloters may havevoted for approval, disapproval, or abstention. George Achakji
Stephane BoisCorinne BrabanFrederick ChildsMichael CrispoNicolas EstivalsHarold GillenHarvey GlickensteinVic GraponneJames Hoelsher
Geoff Hubbs
Kenneth A. Karg
John LaForceMartin LukesDave MaleCharles Martin
Norman. MayBob MillerWilliam Petit
Venkat PindiproluCarl SchwellnusMickey SenaseErrol TaylorJohn VoglerKen VoughtRobert E. WalshDavid Zahorsky
Corinne Braban
Frederick ChildsMichael CrispoDavid DimmerJeff EilenbergNicolas EstivalsHarvey GlickensteinJames Hoelsher
Geoff HubbsKenneth A. KargJohn LaForceMartin LukesCharles MartinNorman MayTom McGeanWilliam Petit
Venkat PindiproluAlan F. RumseyLouis SandersJeffrey SmithJohn VoglerRobert E. Walsh
 
vi 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
When the IEEE-SA Standards Board approved this standard on 23 September 2004, it had the following
membership: 
Don Wright, 
 Chair 
Steve M. Mills,  
Vice Chair 
Judith Gorman, 
  
Secretary 
*Member Emeritus 
Also included are the following nonvoting IEEE-SA Standards Board liaisons: 
Satish K. Aggarwal,  
NRC Representative 
Richard DeBlasio,  
DOE Representative 
Alan Cookson,  
NIST Representative 
Don Messina 
IEEE Standards Project EditorChuck Adams
Stephen BergerMark D. BowmanJoseph A. BruderBob DavisRoberto de Marca BoissonJulian Forster*Arnold M. GreenspanMark S. Halpin
Raymond Hapeman
Richard J. Holleman
Richard H. Hulett
Lowell G. Johnson
Joseph L. Koepfinger*
Hermann Koch
Thomas J. McGean
Daleep C. MohlaPaul Nikolich
T. W. Olsen
Ronald C. Petersen
Gary S. RobinsonFrank Stone
Malcolm V. Thaden
Doug ToppingJoe D. Watson
 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
vii 
Contents 
1. Overview..................................................................................................................... ......................... 1
1.1 Scope....................................................................................................................... ..................... 1
1.2 Purpose..................................................................................................................... .................... 1
1.3 Existing applications....................................................................................................... ............. 1
2. References................................................................................................................... ......................... 2
3. Abbreviations, acronyms, and definitions ..................................................................................... ...... 2
3.1 Definitions................................................................................................................. ................... 2
3.2 Abbreviations and acronyms.................................................................................................. ...... 5
4. General requirements......................................................................................................... .................. 6
4.1 Characteristics of CBTC systems ............................................................................................. ... 6
4.2 Categorization of CBTC systems.............................................................................................. ... 6
4.3 Range of applications....................................................................................................... ............ 6
4.4 Train configurations........................................................................................................ ............. 6
4.5 Train operating modes ....................................................................................................... .......... 7
4.6 Entering/exiting CBTC territory............................................................................................. ..... 9
4.7 Train operating speeds ...................................................................................................... ......... 10
5. Performance requirements ..................................................................................................... ............ 10
5.1 CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways.................................................................. 10
5.2 CBTC factors contributing to achievable trip times .................................................................. 115.3 System safety requirements .................................................................................................. ..... 11
5.4 System assurance requirements ............................................................................................... .. 14
5.5 Environmental requirements.................................................................................................. .... 16
6. Functional requirements...................................................................................................... ............... 16
6.1 ATP functions ............................................................................................................... ............. 16
6.2 ATO functions ............................................................................................................... ............ 23
6.3 ATS functions ............................................................................................................... ............. 24
6.4 Interoperability interface requirements..................................................................................... .2 8
Annex A (informative) Bibliography............................................................................................. ................ 29
Annex B (informative) Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system............................... 30
Annex C (informative) Typical CBTC parameters.................................................................................. ...... 31
Annex D (informative) Typical safe braking model............................................................................... ....... 32
Annex E (normative) System safety program requirements......................................................................... .3 5
Annex F (informative) Typical approaches to specifying CBTC system availability................................... 44
 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
1 
IEEE Standard for Communications-
Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Requirements 
1. Overview 
This standard establishes performance and functional requirements for a CBTC system. It is divided into six
clauses. Clause 1 describes the scope and purpose of this standard. Clause 2 lists references that are useful inapplying this standard. Clause 3 provides definitions that are either not found in other standards or have beenmodified for use with this standard. Clause 4 defines the general operating requirements for CBTC systems,including train operating modes to be supported. Clause 5 defines the performance requirements for CBTCsystems, including headway criteria, system safety criteria, and system availability criteria. Clause 6 definesthe functional requirements for CBTC systems, including automatic train protection (ATP) functions,automatic train operation (ATO) functions, and automatic train supervision (ATS) functions. 
1.1 Scope 
This standard establishes a set of performance and functional requirements necessary for enhancingperformance, availability, operations, and train protection using a CBTC system. 
1.2 Purpose 
There are currently no independent standards defining the performance and functional requirements to besatisfied by CBTC systems. This standard will enhance performance, availability, operations, and trainprotection and will facilitate new CBTC applications. 
1.3 Existing applications 
Existing CBTC installations and projects in progress prior to the publication of this standard need notcomply with the new or revised requirements of this standard, IEEE Std 1474.1-2004, except wherespecifically required by the authority having jurisdiction.
 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC) 
2 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
2. Normative references 
This standard shall be used in conjunction with the following publications. In case of a conflict between this
standard and the referenced document, this standard shall take precedence. Those provisions of thereferenced documents that are not in conflict with this standard shall apply as referenced.
IEEE Std 1474.2 
™ 
-2003, IEEE Standard for User Interface Requirements in Communications-Based Train
Control (CBTC) Systems. 
1,2 
IEEE Std 1475 
™ 
-1999, IEEE Standard for the Functioning of and Interfaces Among Propulsion, Friction
Brake and Train-borne Master Control on Rail Rapid Transit Vehicles.IEEE Std 1477 
™ 
-1998 (Reaff 2003), IEEE Standard for Passenger Information System for Rail Transit
Vehicles.
IEEE Std 1478 
™ 
-2001, IEEE Standard for Environmental Conditions for Transit Rail Car Electronic
Equipment.
IEEE Std 1483 
™ 
-2000, IEEE Standard for Verification of Vital Functions in Processor-Based Systems Used
in Rail Transit Control. 
IEEE Std 1570 
™ 
-2002, IEEE Standard for the Interface Between the Rail Subsystem and the Highway Sub-
system at a Highway Rail Intersection.
IEEE P1582 
™ 
 (Draft 1.0, February 2002), Draft Standard for Environmental Requirements for Rail Transit
Automatic Train Control Systems Wayside Equipment. 
3 
  
3. Abbreviations, acronyms, and definitions 
3.1 Definitions 
For the purposes of this standard, the following terms and definitions apply. IEEE 100,  
The Authoritative
Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms,  
Seventh Edition [B4] 
4 
, should be referenced for terms not defined in
this clause.  
3.1.1  
authority having jurisdiction: 
 The entity that defines the contractual (including specification)
requirements for the procurement. 
3.1.2  
automated people movers (APMs): 
 A guided transit mode with fully automated operations, featuring
vehicles that operate on guideways with exclusive right-of-way. 
3.1.3  
automatic train control (ATC):  
The system for automatically controlling train movement, enforcing
train safety, and directing train operations. ATC must include ATP and may include ATO and/or ATS. 
1 
The IEEE standards or products referred to in this clause are trademarks of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
2 
IEEE publications are available from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ  08854,
USA (http://standards.ieee.org/). 
3 
This IEEE standards project was not approved by the IEEE-SA Standards Board at the time this publication went to press. For inf or-
mation about obtaining a draft, contact the IEEE. 
4 
The numbers in brackets correspond to those of the bibliography in Annex A.
 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
3 
3.1.4  
automatic train operation (ATO):  
The subsystem within the ATC system that performs any or all of
the functions of speed regulation, programmed stopping, door control, performance level regulation, or other
functions otherwise assigned to the train operator. 
3.1.5  
automatic train protection (ATP): 
 The subsystem within the ATC system that maintains fail-safe
protection against collisions, excessive speed, and other hazardous conditions through a combination of traindetection, train separation, and interlocking. 
3.1.6  
automatic train supervision (ATS):  
The subsystem within the ATC system that monitors trains,
adjusts the performance of individual trains to maintain schedules, and provides data to adjust service tominimize inconveniences otherwise caused by irregularities. 
NOTE—The ATS subsystem also typically includes manual and automatic routing functions. 
5 
3.1.7  
auxiliary wayside system:  
  A back-up or secondary train control system, capable of providing full or
partial ATP for trains not equipped with train-borne CBTC equipment and/or trains with partially or totallyinoperative train-borne CBTC equipment. The auxiliary wayside system may include train-borne equipmentand may also provide broken rail detection. 
3.1.8  
basic operating unit: (A) 
 A single vehicle designed for independent operation. 
 (B) 
 A permanent or
semi-permanent combination, designed for independent operation, consisting of two or more vehicles of oneor more types. 
3.1.9  
brake, emergency:  
Fail-safe, open-loop braking to a complete stop, with an assured maximum stop-
ping distance considering all relevant factors. Once the brake application is initiated, it is irretrievable (i.e., itcannot be released until the train has stopped or a predefined time has passed). 
3.1.10  
brake, (maximum) service:  
A non-emergency brake application that obtains the (maximum) brake
rate that is consistent with the design of the brake system, retrievable under the control of master control. 
3.1.11  
car: 
  
See:  
vehicle. 
3.1.12  
civil speed limit: 
 The maximum speed authorized for each section of track, as determined primarily
by the alignment, profile, and structure. 
3.1.13  
communications-based train control (CBTC):  
A continuous ATC system utilizing high-resolution
train location determination, independent of track circuits; continuous, high capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside data communications; and train-borne and wayside processors capable of implementing vitalfunctions. 
3.1.14  
commuter rail: 
 A passenger railroad service that operates within metropolitan areas on trackage that
usually is part of the general railroad system. The operations, primarily for commuters, are generally run aspart of a regional system that is publicly owned or by a railroad company as part of its overall service. 
3.1.15  
consist: 
 The makeup or composition (number and specific identity) of individual units of a train. 
3.1.16  
dwell time: 
 The time a transit unit (vehicle or train) spends at a station or stop, measured as the inter-
val between its stopping and starting. 
3.1.17  
fail-safe:  
A design philosophy applied to safety-critical systems such that the result of hardware fail-
ure or the effect of software error shall either prohibit the system from assuming or maintaining an unsafestate or shall cause the system to assume a state known to be safe. 
5 
Notes in text, tables, and figures are given for information only and do not contain requirements needed to implement the stand ard.
 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC) 
4 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
3.1.18  
headway:  
The time interval between the passing of the front ends of successive vehicles or trains
moving along the same lane or track in the same direction. 
3.1.19  
heavy rail transit:  
A mode of rail rapid transit generally characterized by fully grade-separated con-
struction, operating on exclusive rights-of-way and station platforms at the floor level of the vehicles. 
3.1.20  
interlocking:  
An arrangement of switch, lock, and signal devices that is located where rail tracks
cross, join, separate, and so on. The devices are interconnected in such a way that their movements must
succeed each other in a predefined order, thereby preventing opposing or conflicting train movements. 
3.1.21  
light rail transit: 
 A mode of rail transit characterized by its ability to operate on exclusive rights-of-
way, street running, center reservation running, and grade crossings, and to board and discharge passengersat track or vehicle floor level. 
3.1.22  
master control: 
 The train-borne device or system directly providing the control signals to the train. 
3.1.23  
movement authority:  
The authority for a train to enter and travel through a specific section of track,
in a given travel direction. Movement authorities are assigned, supervised, and enforced by a CBTC systemto maintain safe train separation and to provide protection through interlockings. 
3.1.24  
redundancy: 
 The existence in a system of more than one means of accomplishing a given function. 
3.1.25  
reliability:  
The probability that a system will perform its intended functions without failure, within
design parameters, under specific operating conditions, and for a specific period of time. 
3.1.26  
safe braking model: 
 An analytical representation of a train’s performance while decelerating to a
complete stop, allowing for a combination of worst-case influencing factors and failure scenarios. A CBTC-equipped train will stop in a distance equal to or less than that guaranteed by the safe braking model. 
3.1.27  
safety critical: (A) 
 A term applied to a system or function, the correct performance of which is
critical to safety of personnel and/or equipment.  
(B)  
A term applied to a system or function, the incorrect
performance of which may result in a hazard.    
NOTE—Vital functions are a subset of safety-critical functions. 
3.1.28  
self-revealing failure:  
Failures whose effects on system operation are immediately and clearly
apparent. 
3.1.29  
service, revenue: (A)  
Transit service excluding deadheading or layovers.  
(B)  
Any service scheduled
for passenger trips. 
3.1.30  
system safety:  
The application of engineering and management principles, criteria, and techniques to
optimize all aspects of safety within the constraints of operational effectiveness, time, and cost, throughoutall phases of the system life cycle. 
3.1.31  
System Safety Program: 
 The combined tasks and activities of system safety management and sys-
tem safety engineering that enhance operational effectiveness by satisfying the system safety requirementsin a timely, cost-effective manner throughout the system life cycle. 
3.1.32  
train: 
 A consist of one or more basic operating units. 
3.1.33  
unit: 
 See: 
  
basic operating unit.
 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
5 
3.1.34  
vehicle: 
 A land conveyance assembly for carrying or transporting people and objects capable of tra-
versing a guideway, having structural integrity and general mechanical completeness, but not necessarily
designed for independent operation. 
3.1.35  
vital function:  
A function in a safety-critical system that is required to be implemented in a fail-safe
manner. 
3.2 Abbreviations and acronyms 
APM automated people mover
APTA American Public Transportation Association
AREMA American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association
ASCE American Society of Civil EngineersATC automatic train control
ATO automatic train operation
ATP automatic train protection
ATS automatic train supervision
CBTC communications-based train controlGEBR guaranteed emergency brake rateMTBF mean time between failureMTBFF mean time between functional failure
MTBHE mean time between hazardous eventMTTR mean time to repair
MTTRS mean time to restore service
O&SHA operating and support hazard analysis
PHA preliminary hazard analysisSHA system hazard analysis
SSHA subsystem hazard analysisSSPP System Safety Program Plan
 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC) 
6 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
4. General requirements 
4.1 Characteristics of CBTC systems 
The primary characteristics of a CBTC system include the following:
a) High-resolution train location determination, independent of track circuits 
b) Continuous, high capacity, bidirectional train-to-wayside data communications c) Train-borne and wayside processors performing vital functions 
4.2 Categorization of CBTC systems 
This standard recognizes that different configurations of CBTC systems are possible, depending on the spe-
cific application. For example, a CBTC system may
a) Provide ATP functions only, with no ATO or ATS functions.
b) Provide ATP functions, as well as certain ATO and/or ATS functions, as required to satisfy the
operational needs of the specific application.
c) Be the only train control system in a given application or may be used in conjunction with other
auxiliary wayside systems.
A typical functional block diagram for a CBTC system is given in Annex B. 
4.3 Range of applications 
The CBTC performance and functional requirements defined in this standard are intended to be applicable to
the full range of transit applications, including light rail, heavy rail, and commuter rail transit systems, andshall be applicable to other transit applications, such as automated people movers (APMs) if CBTC is usedfor ATC.  
NOTE—ASCE 21-96 [B3] establishes additional requirements related to operating environment, safety requirements,
system dependability, and audio/visual communications for APM systems. 
It is the intent of this standard that tiered levels of functionality, and interoperability between equipment
provided by multiple vendors, are facilitated to the extent required by the authority having jurisdiction. AllCBTC systems shall include ATP functions.  
4.4 Train configurations 
A CBTC system shall be capable of supporting a variety of train configurations, including the following:
a) Fixed-length unidirectional trains comprised of one or more basic operating units
b) Fixed-length bidirectional trains comprised of one or more basic operating units
c) Variable-length unidirectional trains d) Variable-length bidirectional trains
A CBTC system shall be capable of supporting a mixed fleet of trains, where specific trains, and/or classes
of trains, have different performance characteristics. 
 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
7 
4.5 Train operating modes 
CBTC-equipped trains may be operated by either a single person or a multi-person crew. A CBTC system
may also be required to support operation of trains without crews. 
For operation of trains with crews, the train operator will typically be stationed in the lead car of the train
and will be responsible for moving the train from station to station. With a multi-person crew, the conduc-tor(s) will normally operate from conductor position(s) within the train to operate the train’s doors. A CBTCsystem shall support single-person train operation by combining the conductor and train operator displayinformation on the train operator’s display. For multi-person crews, conductor display information shall alsobe provided on separate conductor displays.
For the purposes of this standard, operation of trains without crews includes both unattended and driverless
train operations. With unattended train operations, there would normally be no crew member onboard thetrain. With driverless train operations, there may be a crew member onboard the train, but normally not inthe driving cab. This crew member, if present, would normally have no responsibility for operation of thetrain except for failure recovery. 
CBTC-equipped trains (including CBTC-equipped maintenance vehicles) shall be capable of operating in
various modes, depending on whether the train is operating in CBTC territory or non-CBTC territory, anddepending on the operational status of the train-borne and/or wayside CBTC equipment.
Mixed-mode operation shall also be considered a normal operating mode, to the extent specified by the
authority having jurisdiction. Mixed-mode operation is defined as the simultaneous operation within CBTCterritory of CBTC-equipped trains and trains that are not equipped with functional train-borne CBTC equip-ment (including maintenance vehicles). Mixed-mode operation may be used in one or more of the followingways:
a) A regularly scheduled mode of operation within CBTC territory
b) An infrequent, unscheduled mode of operation within CBTC territoryc) During the transition period only, as a new CBTC system is cut-in 
d) As a result of train-borne CBTC equipment failures  
4.5.1 Normal train operating modes in CBTC territory
4.5.1.1 CBTC-equipped trains 
CBTC-equipped trains operating in CBTC territory shall operate, within ATP limits, under the protection of
the CBTC system. The train shall be capable of being controlled manually by a train operator orautomatically by the CBTC system (supervised by the train operator, if present), as specified by theauthority having jurisdiction. When operating automatically, some functions (such as door operation andtrain departure initiation) may continue to be the responsibility of the train operator and/or conductor(s), ifpresent. 
4.5.1.2 Non-CBTC-equipped trains  
Trains not equipped with train-borne CBTC equipment and/or trains with inoperative train-borne CBTCequipment that are operating in CBTC territory shall operate under the protection of an auxiliary waysidesystem and/or operating procedures, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.  
4.5.2 Failure mode train operations in CBTC territory 
For light rail, heavy rail, and commuter rail applications operating with crews, it is an operational require-ment to continue to move trains safely in the event of CBTC equipment and/or data communication failures,
 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC) 
8 
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
possibly at reduced operating speeds and/or increased operating headways when compared to normal train
operations. As a consequence, a CBTC system shall be designed to support degraded modes of operation inthe event of failure and to continue to provide ATP with minimum reliance on adherence to operating proce-dures. This shall be achieved through functional elements of the CBTC system itself, an auxiliary waysidesystem (if specified by the authority having jurisdiction), or a combination of both systems. 
For fully automated people mover applications operating without crews, the extent to which the CBTC sys-
tem shall be designed to support degraded modes of operation in the event of failure shall be as defined bythe authority having jurisdiction, and may include an ability to remotely reset train-borne equipment and theability to support automatic push/pull train recovery, as well as the ability to support manual train operationsand alternative routing strategies. 
For all applications, a fall-back plan, based on failure analysis and operating procedures, shall identify train
operating modes that will take advantage of the degraded modes of operation and recovery capabilities ofthe CBTC system. The goal of the plan shall be to eliminate hazards to passengers and staff in accordancewith 5.3, while continuing to provide passenger service. 
Specifically, failure mode train operations in CBTC territory shall address those CBTC system failures
affecting the following:
a) All trains operating within a particular area of control 
b) A particular train operating within any area of control 
4.5.2.1 CBTC system failures affecting all trains operating within a particular area of control 
In the event of a CBTC system failure that affects all CBTC-equipped trains operating within a particular
area of control within CBTC territory (e.g., wayside CBTC equipment or wayside-to-train datacommunications failure), trains shall have the capability to provide continued safe operations under thecontrol of a train operator, and
a) With the protection of an auxiliary wayside system (if specified by the authority having
jurisdiction); or
b) Through strict adherence to operating procedures; or
c) A combination of both items a) and b). 
When operating in this failure mode, ATP functions that reside within individual train-borne CBTC equip-
ment shall continue to function to the extent safety can be assured.  
4.5.2.2 CBTC system failures affecting a particular train operating within any area of control 
In the event of a CBTC system failure affecting a particular CBTC-equipped train operating within any areaof control within CBTC territory (e.g., train-borne CBTC equipment failure), that train shall be capable ofcontinued safe operations under the control of a train operator, and 
a) With the protection of an auxiliary wayside system (if specified by the authority having
jurisdiction); or
b) With the train speed limited by the propulsion system; or
c) Through strict adherence to operating procedures; or
d) A combination of any or all of items a), b), and c). 
When operating in this failure mode, ATP functions that reside within wayside CBTC equipment and within
other train-borne CBTC equipment shall continue to function to the extent safety can be assured. 
 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 
9 
4.5.3 Normal train operating modes in non-CBTC territory 
For the purposes of this standard, non-CBTC territory is defined as any territory that is not equipped with
wayside CBTC equipment fully compatible with the train-borne CBTC equipment. 
CBTC equipment installed on trains operating in non-CBTC territory shall include the necessary capabilities
to support transitions into CBTC territory. In addition, if specified by the authority having jurisdiction, train-borne CBTC equipment may also perform other ATP functions while operating in non-CBTC territory, suchas limiting train speed and/or providing zero speed detection. 
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, train-borne CBTC equipment operating in non-CBTC
territory may also interface with wayside equipment that is not fully compatible with the train-borne CBTCequipment. In no case, however, shall the train-borne CBTC equipment provide an indication of standardCBTC operation when operating in non-CBTC territory, unless the applicable authority or authoritieshaving jurisdiction over the train-borne and wayside equipment have ensured that standard CBTC operationis supported by the integrated train-borne and wayside systems.  
4.5.4 Failure mode train operations in non-CBTC territory 
Except where specified to perform certain ATP functions while operating in non-CBTC territory, failure ofthe train-borne CBTC equipment shall have minimal impact on train operation. The failure shall be indi-cated to the train operator, if present.  
4.6 Entering/exiting CBTC territory 
4.6.1 Entering into CBTC territory 
A CBTC system shall have precise knowledge of the limits of CBTC territory and shall include the capabil-ity to perform verification checks of the train-borne CBTC equipment prior to entering CBTC territory. Thechecks shall be performed sufficiently in advance of entry into CBTC territory to verify the proper operationof the train-borne CBTC equipment (including any wayside CBTC equipment dependencies). 
If the verification check is passed, an indication to this effect shall be provided. Under normal circumstances
and subject to ATP constraints, it shall not be necessary for a train to come to a stop when entering CBTCterritory unless required for other operational reasons. 
In the event that the verification check fails, an indication of the CBTC system failure shall be provided, and
train operation may revert to the auxiliary wayside signal system if available or to operating rules if no aux-iliary wayside signal system is provided.
The results of the verification checks shall be displayed on the ATS user interface. For trains operating with
crews, the results of the verification checks shall also be indicated to the train operator.  
4.6.2 Exiting from CBTC territory 
For trains operating with crews, prior to exiting CBTC territory, a CBTC system may provide a visual indi-cation to the train operator of time and/or distance until the train will be exiting the CBTC territory. Whenknown by the CBTC system, the train operator may also receive an indication of the type of train controlsystem into which the train will be traversing.  
NOTE—Indications to the train operator may not be required if the transition between CBTC territory and non-CBTC
territory is operationally transparent to the train operator. 
 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
10 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.Under normal circumstances and subject to ATP constraints, it shall not be necessary for a train to come to a
stop when exiting CBTC territory unless required for other operational reasons. 
4.7 Train operating speeds
A CBTC system shall be capable of meeting the performance and functional requirements of this standard,over the full range of possible train operating speeds specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
5. Performance requirements
5.1 CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways
The required design and operating headways (i.e., the minimum and scheduled headways) for both normaland reverse directions shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction. Headway may be specified asuninterfered and/or interfered.
In all cases, the design headway shall be constrained by the safe train separation requirements and the safe
braking model of 6.1.2.1.
In the case of an uninterfered headway, a train speed profile shall not be affected by a preceding train. All
trains shall, therefore, perform at the maximum allowed speed, depending on the civil speed limits and theacceleration and braking capabilities of the trains themselves. Operation at uninterfered headways facilitatesa minimum end-to-end trip time for a given set of station dwell times.
Headways may be reduced (at the expense of increased trip times) with an interfered headway where a train
speed profile is affected by a preceding train such that a following train decelerates on the approach to astation and enters the station area at a reduced speed. Interfered headway may also be specified to supportmultiple berthings at a station platform.
The design headway for a particular line and a particular set of vehicles involves many factors that are out-
side the control of the CBTC system (e.g., track alignment, gradients, civil speed limits, train accelerationand braking rates, station dwell times, terminal track configurations, driver reaction times). These factorsshall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction. This standard addresses only those CBTC factors con-tributing to achievable headways, of which the most significant are the following:
a) Location (both accuracy of measured end-of-train locations and resolution of movement authority
limits for a given train), including the frequency at which location reports and movement authoritiesare updated.
b) Speed, including both accuracy of speed measurement and resolution of speed limits established for
a given train at a given location.
c) Communications delays, including nominal and worst-case transmission times of command/status
messages between wayside and train, and vice versa. (Command/status messages include, forexample, messages related to movement authority updates and/or location report updates.)
d) CBTC equipment reaction times, including maximum error accumulation, for both wayside and
train-borne equipment, and for various operating modes, as applicable. (CBTC equipment reactiontimes include, for example, the time required to establish new movement authority limits followinglocation report updates, the time to establish new movement authority limits through aninterlocking, and the time to determine a new ATP profile following movement authority update.)
e) CBTC system performance limitations (e.g., the maximum number of trains that can be processed
by the CBTC system, within a given area of control).
f) CBTC automatic speed regulation algorithm. 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 11Typical values for the CBTC parameters in items a) through e) are given in Annex C.
5.2 CBTC factors contributing to achievable trip times
Trip time requirements shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction, consistent with train perfor-
mance and track alignment characteristics.
The minimum end-to-end trip times for a defined set of station dwell times will result from uninterfered
headway speed profiles. The CBTC factors contributing to achievable headways, as identified in 5.1, willalso be factors contributing to the minimum achievable trip times.
5.3 System safety requirements
5.3.1 CBTC System Safety Program requirements
A System Safety Program shall be instituted during the CBTC system planning/design phase and shall
continue throughout the system life cycle. The CBTC System Safety Program shall emphasize theprevention of accidents by identifying and resolving hazards in a systematic manner. A CBTC SystemSafety Program Plan (SSPP) shall be developed for each CBTC application. The CBTC SSPP shall beprepared in accordance with the requirements of E.1 of Annex E or the requirements of the American PublicTransit Association’s Manual [B1] or equivalent requirements, as approved by the authority havingjurisdiction.
Implementation of the CBTC SSPP shall specifically recognize configuration management issues, given the
importance of software and hardware configuration control in maintaining system safety.   
5.3.2 CBTC hazard identification and risk assessment processHazard analyses shall be employed during the design of a CBTC system to assist in the identification and
evaluation of potential hazards to assess their likelihood and severity and to document their resolution. As aminimum, a preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) shall be conducted for each new CBTC system project.Other detailed analyses, including system/subsystem hazard analyses, failure modes, effects and criticalityanalyses, fault tree analyses, and operational and support hazard analyses, shall also be conducted if man-dated by the CBTC SSPP. These analyses shall be conducted in accordance with E.2, E.3, E.4, and E.5 ofAnnex E or equivalent requirements, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
All hazards identified through the CBTC System Safety Program shall be assessed in terms of the severity or
consequence of the hazard and the probability of occurrence. This shall be accomplished in generalaccordance with the criteria outlined in E.6 of Annex E or the equivalent, as approved by the authorityhaving jurisdiction. Risk assessment estimates shall be used as the basis in the decision-making process todetermine whether individual system or subsystem hazards shall be eliminated, mitigated, or accepted. Thisprocess shall include full documentation of the hazard resolution activities.
Hazards shall be resolved through a design process that emphasizes the elimination of the hazard. The
effectiveness of the hazard resolution strategies and countermeasures shall be monitored to determine thatno new hazards are introduced. In addition, whenever substantive changes are made to the system, analysesshall be conducted to identify and resolve any new hazards.
As a minimum, a CBTC system shall address the following critical/catastrophic system hazards through the
implementation of the ATP functions defined in 6.1:
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
12 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.a) Train-to-train collisions (rear-end, sideswipe, head-on); hazard to be addressed through train
separation assurance (see 6.1.2), rollback protection (see 6.1.4), parted consist protection (see 6.1.6),
route interlocking protection (see 6.1.11), and traffic direction reversal interlocks (see 6.1.12)
b) Train-to-structure collisions; hazard to be addressed through end-of-track protection (see 6.1.5) and
restricted route protection (see 6.1.16)
c) Train derailments; hazard to be addressed through overspeed protection (see 6.1.3), route
interlocking protection (see 6.1.11), and (where specified by the authority having jurisdiction)broken rail detection (see 6.1.14)
d) Collisions between trains and highway vehicles (where highway crossing at grade exists within the
limits of CBTC territory); hazard to be addressed through grade-crossing warning devices that mayinclude interfaces to the CBTC system (see 6.1.15)
e) Hazards to work crews and work trains; hazards to be addressed through CBTC work zone
protection functions (see 6.1.13) 
f) Hazards to passengers associated with train movement with train doors open; hazards to be
addressed through interface between the CBTC system and the train door system (where required bythe authority having jurisdiction) to provide door opening control protection interlocks (see 6.1.8),zero speed detection (see 6.1.7), and departure interlocks (see 6.1.9)
g) Hazards associated with collisions with objects on the track; hazards to be addressed through inter-
faces between the CBTC system and intrusion detection devices (where specified by the authorityhaving jurisdiction) (see 6.1.16) 
5.3.3 CBTC vital functions
To eliminate or control to a level acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction those hazards judged to be
unacceptable or undesirable through the risk assessment process of 5.3.2, a CBTC system shall include, as aminimum, the vital functions identified in 6.1. 
All vital functions of a CBTC system shall be designed and implemented in accordance with fail-safe
principles. Documentation of the means used, and proof that fail-safe principles have been met and the meantime between hazardous event (MTBHE) requirements of 5.3.4 have been satisfied, shall be required forevery CBTC system. 
Verification that the processor-based portions of a CBTC system meet these minimum system safety
requirements shall be completed in accordance with IEEE Std 1483-2000.
6 
5.3.4 Quantitative CBTC safety performance requirements
For any CBTC system application, the CBTC wayside and train-borne equipment located within any
contiguous portion of a one-way route that can be traversed by a train traveling at the specified maximumauthorized speed for one hour or less shall have a total calculated aggregate MTBHE (total of all critical andcatastrophic hazards) of at least 10
9 operating hours. This includes the maximum number of other trains that
can be located in this contiguous portion of a one-way route under the specified peak operating headway.System safety documentation shall support these calculations and substantiate the methodology used toarrive at the result. For the purposes of MTBHE calculations, a hazardous event shall include, as aminimum, the occurrence of any of the specific hazards identified in 5.3.2.
NOTE—If the end-to-end trip time for a given route is greater than 1 h, the MTBHE requirement for that route would be
adjusted proportionately. As an illustrative example, if the specified end-to-end trip time (per 5.2) for a given one-wayroute is 2 h, and if the route includes 4 sets of wayside CBTC equipment, and if a maximum of 10 trains can be operatingon the route at a given time (when operating at the specified peak headway, per 5.1), then the MTBHE of the combined4 sets of wayside CBTC equipment and 10 sets of train-borne CBTC equipment on that route would be at least 0.5 × 10
9
operating hours.
6Information on references can be found in Clause 2.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 135.3.5 Basic safety design principles 
5.3.5.1 Normal transit system operations with no CBTC hardware failures
A CBTC system shall respond safely and correctly perform all ATP functions within the normal range of
inputs and other operating and environmental conditions. 
All conditions necessary for the existence of any permissive state or action shall be verified to be present
before the permissive state or action is initiated by a CBTC system. The requisite conditions shall be verifiedto be continuously present for the permissive state or action to be maintained.
System safety shall not depend on the correctness of actions taken or procedures used by operating
personnel. 
Procedures shall not be considered a substitute for safety functions that are to be vested in specific CBTC
components or equipment.
5.3.5.2 Abnormal transit system operations with no CBTC hardware failuresA CBTC system shall respond safely under conditions of abnormal system loading, abnormal/improper
inputs, and other abnormal external influences such as electrical, mechanical, and environmental factors.
5.3.5.3 Response to CBTC hardware failuresA CBTC system shall respond safely under conditions of credible hardware failure. 
NOTE—The AREMA Communications & Signals Manual, Part 17.3.3 [B2], provides examples of credible hardware
failures. 
Failure to perform a logical operation or absence of a logical input, output, or decision shall not cause an
unsafe condition, i.e., system safety shall not depend upon the occurrence of an action or logical decision.
Hazard analyses shall consider all credible CBTC hardware failure modes. Justification shall be provided for
conceivable failure modes that are not considered credible. The effect of each credible CBTC failure modeshall be classified as either self-revealing or non-self-revealing, as follows:
— No credible single point CBTC hardware failure, whether self-revealing or non-self-revealing, shall
cause an unsafe condition.
— No credible CBTC hardware failure in combination with one or more non-self-revealing failure shall
cause an unsafe condition. In the instance of a non-self-revealing failure, a subsequent failure shallnot be considered independent.
— The probability of a critical or catastrophic hazard arising as a result of combinations of simulta-
neous independent self-revealing failures shall be considered in the calculated CBTC MTBHE.
5.3.5.4 Recovery from CBTC hardware failures
A combination of functional elements of the CBTC system itself, an auxiliary wayside system (if specified
by the authority having jurisdiction), and/or operating procedures shall provide for the safety of train move-ment under failure conditions, including failure recovery.
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
14 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.5.4 System assurance requirements
5.4.1 General
The ability of a CBTC system to accomplish the functional requirements of this standard, under normal
conditions and under conditions of equipment failure, is of paramount importance to the authority havingjurisdiction. This subclause establishes qualitative availability, reliability, and maintainability criteria forCBTC systems and equipment in order to meet or exceed the on-time performance and fleet availabilityobjectives of the authority having jurisdiction, and thereby minimize delays experienced by passengers. Inaddressing CBTC equipment failures, a distinction shall be made between the following failure types:
a) Type 1:  Those failures, or combination of failures, that impact on-time performance of the transit
system.
b) Type 2:  Those failures, or combination of failures, that do not impact on-time performance of the
transit system, but do result in some other loss of specified CBTC functionality.
c) Type 3:  Those failures that do not impact on-time performance of the transit system or result in a
loss of any specified CBTC functionality (e.g., because of equipment redundancy).
The CBTC system availability requirement (see 5.4.2) shall include consideration of all Type 1 failures, aswell as the mean time to restore service (MTTRS) for Type 1 failures.
The CBTC system mean time between functional failure (MTBFF) requirement (see 5.4.3) shall include
consideration of all Type 1 and Type 2 failures.
The CBTC system mean time between failure (MTBF) requirement (see 5.4.3) shall include consideration of
all Type 1, Type 2, and Type 3 failures.
While system availability, system MTBFF, and system MTBF predictions traditionally consider only hard-
ware failures, measurements of achieved system availability, system MTBFF, and system MTBF shall alsoconsider software errors (i.e., software fails to perform intended function) as well as hardware failures.
The following general recommended practices apply:
1) Components and materials should be selected and appropriate standards of quality control and test
procedures should be employed to ensure the lowest practical hardware failure rates for individual
items of CBTC equipment (i.e., maximize the hardware portion of the system MTBF).
2) Unless non-redundant equipment is sufficiently reliable to satisfy the overall system availability
requirements, appropriate levels of equipment redundancy should be employed such that the failureof a single component, processor, or device will not render the CBTC system unavailable or an oper-ationally critical function nonoperative (i.e., maximize the system MTBFF).
3) A CBTC system should incorporate degraded modes of operation to minimize the operational
impacts of equipment failures and to permit train movements to continue safely (i.e., maximize sys-tem availability). 
4) CBTC system downtime or unavailability of an operationally critical function should be minimized
through the use of local and remote diagnostic capabilities and appropriate operating and mainte-nance procedures [i.e., minimize mean time to repair (MTTR)].
5.4.2 System availability requirements
Quantitative CBTC system availability requirements shall be established by the authority having jurisdiction
with appropriate consideration of the impacts of CBTC system and subsystem failures on the operation ofthe transit system. Typical methods for defining CBTC system availability are provided in Annex F. 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 15As specified by the authority having jurisdiction, system availability analysis/modeling shall be used to
predict the system availability for a given CBTC system configuration, based on equipment reliability/maintainability calculations, equipment redundancy provisions, and other defined assumptions.
As specified by the authority having jurisdiction, system availability demonstration tests shall be performed
to determine actual CBTC system availability over a defined period, to a given confidence level.    
5.4.3 Equipment reliability requirementsQuantitative CBTC system and subsystem MTBF and MTBFF requirements shall be established by the
authority having jurisdiction, consistent with the CBTC system availability requirement of 5.4.2.
5.4.3.1 Design lifeCBTC equipment shall have a design life of 30 y.
NOTE—The ability of a CBTC system to remain in operation to the end of its design life will be driven largely by long-
term availability of spare parts. Specific requirements with respect to spare part availability shall be defined by theauthority having jurisdiction and do not form part of this standard.
5.4.4 Equipment maintainability requirements
A CBTC system shall be designed to minimize required maintenance (both preventive and corrective) by
maximizing the system MTBF and by including features that provide for ease of maintenance by mainte-nance personnel. 
The mean time to repair/replace a failed piece of in-service CBTC equipment (i.e., first-level repair) shall
include on-site diagnostics, the replacement of failed components, and the testing of the repaired units, sub-system, or system, but shall exclude travel time to the site. A separate MTTR requirement may be definedfor second-level repair (i.e., shop repair of a failed line replaceable unit). 
The first-level MTTR shall be no greater than 30 min. The second level MTTR, if specified, shall be no
greater than 2 h.
Achievable repair times will be driven by equipment diagnostic provisions and available test equipment, as
well as the quality of the maintenance manuals and training. A CBTC system shall, therefore, include main-tenance and diagnostic capabilities to detect and react to CBTC equipment failures. This shall includeremote diagnostics capabilities as well as local built-in test equipment and other fault displays for trouble-shooting, and the timely identification of failed components and functions.
Data logging capabilities shall also be provided in wayside and train-borne CBTC equipment. The logged
data shall be capable of being analyzed to be able to recreate the sequence of events leading to an incident.This will allow maintenance personnel to identify the cause of any failure and/or mis-operation of CBTCequipment that cannot be identified by the in-built diagnostics of the equipment. The scope of logged CBTCevents shall be established by the authority having jurisdiction.
A CBTC system design shall include capabilities to permit periodic verification of ATP hardware, software,
and data, including verification of correct response to interference on the train-to-wayside data link. To theextent specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall also include capabilities to facili-tate modifications (by the user) to CBTC system parameters, track databases, and applications software. Thesupplier of the CBTC system shall identify to the authority having jurisdiction those specific changes toCBTC system parameters, track databases, and applications software that will have no impact on systemsafety.
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
16 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.5.5 Environmental requirements
Train-borne CBTC equipment shall comply with the requirements of IEEE Std 1478-2001.
Wayside CBTC equipment shall comply with the requirements of IEEE P1582/D1.0. 
6. Functional requirements
A CBTC system shall include the capability for providing ATP, ATO, and ATS functions. ATP functions
shall provide fail-safe protection against collisions, excessive speed, and other hazardous conditions. ATPfunctions shall have precedence over both the ATO and ATS functions. ATO functions shall control basicoperations that would otherwise be performed by a train operator and shall do so within the protection limitsimposed by ATP. ATS functions shall provide system status information and the means to monitor and over-ride the automatic control for various functions of the system. 
The CBTC train-to-wayside communications interface shall be sufficient to support all required ATP, ATO,
and ATS functions. The data link shall provide continuous geographic coverage within CBTC territory andshall support train operations in tunnels, tubes, and cuts, on elevated structures, and at grade. The data linkshall support bidirectional data transfer and shall exhibit sufficiently low latency to support the defined per-formance requirements. The data link shall include a protocol structure to support safe, timely, and securedelivery of train control messages.
6.1 ATP functions
All ATP functions shall be vital functions and shall be designed and implemented in accordance with 5.3. 
A CBTC system shall be capable of providing bidirectional ATP.6.1.1 Train location/train speed determination
6.1.1.1 CBTC train location/train speed determination
CBTC train location/train speed determination shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system
configuration.
A CBTC system shall establish the location, speed, and travel direction of each CBTC-equipped train oper-
ating in CBTC territory. 
CBTC train location determination shall safely and accurately establish the location of both the front and
rear of the train. The CBTC train location determination function shall provide sufficient train locationresolution and accuracy to support the performance and safety requirements of this standard. Train locationresolution and accuracy parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C.WARNING
Changes made to CBTC system parameters, track databases, and application software, other than thoseidentified by the supplier as not impacting safety, can affect safe system operation. Prior to implementingany such changes, applicable hazard analyses of 5.3.2 shall be reassessed to verify that the modifiedsystem will still meet all requirements of this standard including, but not limited to, 5.3.3, 5.3.4, and5.3.5. Changes shall be implemented in accordance with the CBTC SSPP of 5.3.1.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 17The CBTC train location determination function shall be self-initializing and shall automatically detect and
establish the location of each CBTC-equipped train as it enters CBTC territory and on recovery from CBTCequipment failures, without requiring manual input of train location or train length data.
The CBTC train speed determination function shall provide sufficient speed measurement resolution and
accuracy to support the performance and safety requirements of this standard. Speed measurement resolu-tion and accuracy parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C.
A CBTC system shall compensate for the effects of measurement inaccuracies on train location and speed
determination. Specifically, if the CBTC train location/speed determination function is dependent uponwheel rotation, the CBTC system shall correct for position errors induced by the slipping or sliding ofwheels and shall correct for position errors caused by variation in wheel size due to wear, trueing, orreplacement.
6.1.1.2 Secondary train location determinationIf specified by the authority having jurisdiction, an auxiliary wayside system may provide secondary train
location determination to establish if a section of track is occupied by one or more trains, including trains notequipped with train-borne CBTC equipment and/or trains with inoperative train-borne CBTC equipment. Itwill not be necessary to determine the location of non-CBTC-equipped trains, or trains with inoperativetrain-borne CBTC equipment, to the same accuracy as CBTC-equipped trains.
6.1.2 Safe train separationSafe train separation shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration.Safe train separation shall be provided between all trains operating in CBTC territory, whether or not the
trains are CBTC equipped. 
A CBTC system shall provide safe train separation between CBTC-equipped trains. Safe train separation
shall be based upon the principle of an instantaneous (brick wall) stop of the preceding train.
For mixed-mode operation (see 4.5), safe train separation shall be provided through an auxiliary wayside
system and/or through strict adherence to operating procedures, as specified by the authority havingjurisdiction.
If secondary train location determination is provided through an auxiliary wayside system (see 6.1.1.2), then
for a CBTC-equipped train following a non-CBTC-equipped train or a train with inoperative train-borneCBTC equipment, a CBTC system shall limit the movement authority of the following train to the boundaryof the section of track occupied by the non-CBTC-equipped or failed train. If specified by the authority hav-ing jurisdiction, the CBTC system may further limit the movement authority to the route entry point of aroute occupied by the non-CBTC-equipped train or failed train. 
The CBTC safe train separation function shall consist of the following:
a) The calculation of the ATP profile (i.e., the profile of safe speed as a function of train location),
derived from fixed ATP data (e.g., permanent speed limits) and variable ATP data (e.g., temporary
speed limits and movement authority limit)
b) The supervision and enforcement of the ATP profile calculated by the CBTC system
The ATP profile shall be governed by a safe braking model (see 6.1.2.1) and shall ensure that under no cir-cumstances (including failures) will the movement authority limit be exceeded by a CBTC-equipped train. 
The movement authority limit shall be the most restrictive of the following: 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
18 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.— The rear of a CBTC-equipped train ahead (as determined by the CBTC train location function in
6.1.1.1), with allowance for any location uncertainty
— The boundary of a section of track occupied by a non-CBTC-equipped train or a train with inopera-
tive train-borne CBTC equipment (as determined by an auxiliary wayside system, if provided, per
6.1.1.2)
— The end-of-track (see 6.1.5)
— The entrance to an interlocking, when the route is not verified as aligned and locked (see 6.1.11)
— The boundary of a section of track with an opposing traffic direction established (see 6.1.12)
— The boundary of a blocked track (see 6.1.13)
— If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, the entrance to a highway grade crossing where
warning devices are not confirmed to be operating (see 6.1.15)
— The entrance to a route that is detected to be unsafe for train movement (see 6.1.16)
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, the CBTC safe train separation function shall support auto-matic close-up of trains and automatic coupling and uncoupling of trains in designated areas.
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided to bypass the CBTC safe train
separation function to allow a train, under the control of a train operator, to travel beyond its movementauthority limit (e.g., at a restricted speed), for failure recovery purposes. 
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided to pull back (i.e., make more
restrictive) a movement authority limit previously granted to a train. If the train were approaching or brakingtoward the original movement authority limit, the train may be in violation of the new ATP profile. Undersuch circumstances, a CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake application. The brake applicationmay be an immediate emergency brake application or a supervised service brake application, as specified bythe authority having jurisdiction (see 6.1.3).
6.1.2.1 Safe braking modelA safe braking model shall be developed for each CBTC application. The safe braking model shall, as a minimum, include consideration of the following:
a) Location uncertainty of lead train (including rollback tolerance)
b) Location uncertainty of following trainc) Train lengthd) Train configuration (see 4.4) e) Allowable overspeed permitted by the CBTC systemf) Maximum CBTC speed measurement errorg) CBTC system reaction times and latenciesh) Maximum train acceleration rate possible at the time an overspeed condition is detected by the
CBTC system
i) Worst-case reaction times to disable the propulsion system and apply the emergency brakes
following detection of an overspeed condition by the CBTC system
j) Guaranteed emergency brake rate (GEBR)k) Grade
The GEBR shall be the minimum emergency brake rate achieved by a train on level tangent track under the
range of environmental conditions and worst-case credible latent brake equipment failure modes, which canbe anticipated to exist for that train in the specific application. The GEBR shall be specified by the authority
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 19having jurisdiction and shall include consideration of maximum passenger load (plus snow and ice load if
applicable), minimum anticipated adhesion levels, and maximum design tailwind.
A typical safe braking model is provided in Annex D.
A CBTC system shall have the capability to support multiple safe braking models to accommodate different
train acceleration/braking rates for different classes and configurations of trains operating simultaneouslywithin CBTC territory and to accommodate automatic close-up and automatic coupling/uncouplingcapabilities, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. A CBTC system shall incorporate appropriateprotection to ensure that the correct safe braking model is applied for a given train at a given location.
6.1.3 Overspeed protection and brake assuranceOverspeed protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration.In establishing, supervising, and enforcing the ATP profile, as governed by the safe braking model of
6.1.2.1, a CBTC system shall ensure that under no circumstances, including failures, will the train’s actualspeed exceed its safe speed. The safe speed shall be derived by considering the most restrictive of thefollowing:
a) The permanent speed limits on sections of track within the ATP profile
b) Any temporary speed restrictions on sections of track within the ATP profilec) Any permanent speed restriction applicable to the particular class or configuration of traind) Any speed restrictions enforced on the train because of train-borne failure conditions
e) The maximum speed that would allow the train to stop safely prior to the limit of the train’s
movement authority or to slow down sufficiently to meet appropriate permanent or temporary speed
restrictions upon entering that section of track
Speed limits and restrictions shall apply when any portion of the train is within the speed limit area.
Speed limit/speed restriction resolution parameters for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C.Enforcement of the calculated ATP profile shall be achieved by comparing the CBTC-determined train
speed with the ATP profile speed at the CBTC-determined train location. If the ATP profile speed at thatlocation is exceeded, the CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake application.
The brake application may be an immediate emergency brake application or a supervised service brake
application, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. In the latter case, a CBTC system shall monitorthe achieved brake rate to ensure an acceptable brake rate is achieved within a predetermined time frame; ifnot, it shall immediately apply the emergency brakes. The safe braking model shall include appropriateallowances for reaction times associated with this brake assurance function.
6.1.4 Rollback protectionRollback protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration.A CBTC system shall monitor actual train travel direction and shall compare measured travel direction with
the CBTC established/commanded direction of traffic. Train motion against traffic for more than a specifiedrollback tolerance shall result in the CBTC system initiating an emergency brake application. Rollbackdetection criteria for typical CBTC systems are included in Annex C. 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
20 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.6.1.5 End-of-track protection
End-of-track protection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration that permits
the operation of trains up to, or in close proximity to, an end-of-track terminus.
End-of-track protection shall be incorporated into, or function in conjunction with, overspeed protection to
prevent trains from over-traveling the end-of-track or, if buffers are specified, to prevent trains from exceed-ing the design limits for impact with an end-of-track buffer. End-of-track protection design shall be based onthe safe braking model of 6.1.2.1.
6.1.6 Parted consist protection and coupling and uncoupling of trainsWhere separate vehicles can be coupled together in a consist of two or more vehicles or units to form a train,
a CBTC system shall have the capability of detecting and protecting parted trains. Parted consist protectionshall be required regardless of whether the individual vehicles or units are considered to be permanentlycoupled or whether they are routinely uncoupled for maintenance or operational purposes.
A CBTC system shall also support operating requirements for coupling and uncoupling of trains, including
automatic update of the consist length within the CBTC system.
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system may assume a fixed, worst-case, maximum
train length for a given class of trains operating in CBTC territory, with a reliance on operating proceduresto ensure this maximum train length is not exceeded.
6.1.7 Zero speed detectionZero speed detection shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system configuration and shall be in
accordance with the requirements of 5.10 of IEEE Std 1475-1999. 
Zero speed detection criteria for typical CBTC systems and applications are included in Annex C.6.1.8 Door opening control protection interlocks
If trains are operated with crews, door open control protection interlocks may be a required ATP function, at
the option of the authority having jurisdiction. For operation of trains without crews, door open controlprotection interlocks shall be mandatory. These interlocks, if provided, shall ensure that the followingconditions are satisfied prior to enabling the opening of the train doors (and platform doors, if fitted):
a) The train is “properly aligned” at a designated stopping point, where the designated stopping point
and required tolerances shall be as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
b) There is a platform (or other location specified by the authority having jurisdiction) on the side of
the train for which the door opening is allowed. 
c) Zero speed is detected, in accordance with 6.1.7.
d) The train is constrained against motion.
Selective door open enable shall be possible for those applications where the train length exceeds the plat-
form length.
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided for a local manual bypass of the
preceding door open control protection interlocks, for failure recovery purposes.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 216.1.9 Departure interlocks
If trains are operated with crews, departure interlocks may be a required ATP function, at the option of the
authority having jurisdiction. For operation of trains without crews, departure interlocks shall be mandatory.These interlocks, if provided, shall prevent a stationary train from moving (e.g., by disabling the propulsionsystem) unless all train doors (and platform edge doors, if fitted) are properly closed and locked, in accor-dance with the requirements of 5.14 of IEEE Std 1475-1999.
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, facilities may be provided for a local manual bypass of the
preceding departure interlocks, for failure recovery purposes. 
6.1.10 Emergency brakingThe train’s emergency brake system shall be capable of bringing the train to a stop within the assured stop-
ping distance determined by the safe braking model of 6.1.2.1. Specific criteria for resetting the emergencybrakes to allow normal operation to resume shall be specified by the authority having jurisdiction. If condi-tions (as determined by ATP) are not correct for train movement, the emergency braking shall remainapplied regardless of any reset signals or actions, except that facilities may be provided for a local manualbypass of the ATP functions for that train to permit manual train operation for failure recovery purposes.Use of such facilities shall require strict adherence to operating procedures to ensure the safety of trainmovements. If correct ATP conditions exist after the emergency brakes have been reset, the train shall bepermitted to move or continue to move; however, if the actual train speed again exceeds the ATP profilespeed or a subsequent malfunction occurs, emergency braking shall be applied as before.
6.1.11 Route interlockingA CBTC system shall provide route interlocking functions equivalent to conventional interlocking practice
to prevent train collisions and derailments. These functions shall include locking of the route in advance ofthe train entering the interlocking (time or approach locking) and once the train is in the interlocking (routelocking). The switches shall also be locked when the track section containing the switch is occupied by atrain (detector locking). Locking functions shall also apply to moveable bridges and similar right-of-wayapparatus. Sectional release (of routes behind a train) may be provided where specified by the authority hav-ing jurisdiction.
NOTE—The AREMA Communications & Signals Manual, Sections 2 and 16 [B2], provides examples of recommended
practices for use in interlocking design. 
A movement authority shall not be advanced into an interlocking until the appropriate route is set and
locked. Once a movement authority has been advanced through an interlocking, the affected route shall notbe released and conflicting routes cleared unless either the train has traveled through and is verified clear ofthe interlocking or the movement authority is pulled back short of the interlocking and is in effect.
Where an auxiliary wayside system is specified by the authority having jurisdiction, interlocking functions
may be provided by separate interlocking equipment, which is based on train position established by asecondary train detection subsystem. In this case, a CBTC system shall interface to and may modify theconventional interlocking functions based on train position established by the CBTC train locationdetermination function, to safely enable the enhanced performance capabilities of a CBTC system to berealized. 
6.1.11.1 CBTC interfaces to a separate interlockingWhere an auxiliary wayside system or separate interlocking is specified, a CBTC system shall interface to
interlockings as follows:
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
22 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.a) Time or approach locking shall apply, except in the event of a route being canceled for an
approaching CBTC train (i.e., the movement authority is pulled back short of the interlocking and is
in effect). In this case, if the train is greater than a safe braking distance from the entrance to theinterlocking (as determined by the safe braking model of 6.1.2.1) or the train stops prior to enteringthe interlocking, the route shall be released without running further time. 
b) Traffic locking may be overridden so that CBTC-equipped trains may move in opposing directions
within their respective movement authorities on the same track at the same time.
c) Wayside signals and their aspects may be provided as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
A CBTC system may override the conventional aspects to cause the signal(s) to display CBTCaspect(s) only to CBTC-equipped trains.
6.1.11.2 Responses to CBTC train location failures
In the event of a failure of the CBTC train location determination function, route locking shall remain in
effect until the train is proven to be clear of the interlocking by the CBTC system (i.e., the train is subse-quently determined to be clear of the interlocking limits), or through operating procedures, or a combinationof both approaches.
In the event of a failure of the CBTC train location determination function in an interlocking where train
location is also capable of being detected by means of a secondary system, CBTC system overrides of theinterlocking functions may be released, provided route and other locking functions are maintained by theauxiliary wayside system so as to prevent the movement of a switch in front of and under the train until thetrain is proven to be clear of the interlocking.
6.1.11.3 Response to loss of switch indicationIn the event of a loss of switch indication once a movement authority has been issued through an interlock-
ing, a CBTC system shall pull back the movement authority to the entrance of the interlocking. If a train isalready within a safe braking distance of the switch, the CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brakeapplication (see 6.1.2).
6.1.12 Traffic direction reversal interlocksTraffic direction reversal interlocks shall be a required ATP function for any CBTC system application
requiring bidirectional operations, in order to support reversal of train direction at terminal stations and tosupport intermediate turn backs and shuttle modes of operation, for example.
It shall not be possible to extend the movement authority for a train into a section of track where an opposing
traffic direction has already been established.
A reversal of traffic direction within a section of track shall not be possible unless
a) All trains within that section of track are at zero speed and constrained against motion in the original
traffic direction, and
b) The movement authorities for all trains outside of that section of track do not extend into the section
and are constrained from being extended into the section in the original traffic direction. 
6.1.13 Work zone protectionA CBTC system shall not grant movement authorities to trains to operate into out-of-service (blocked)
tracks or through switches blocked in other than the required position and shall enforce restricted speeds onapproach to and through defined work zones (see 6.3.7.4). A CBTC system may also include capabilities topreclude ATO mode of operation through a work zone. 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 236.1.14 Broken rail detection
Where specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system may interface to an auxiliary wayside
system for purposes of broken rail detection. A CBTC system’s reaction to a detected broken rail shall be asspecified by the authority having jurisdiction.
6.1.15 Highway grade-crossing warningWhere highway crossings at grade exist within the limits of CBTC territory and where specified by the
authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system may interface to grade-crossing warning devices to permitcontrol of such devices based on CBTC location reports and to coordinate movement authorities through thecrossing based on the status from such devices. Specific requirements shall be defined by the authority hav-ing jurisdiction and may include the following:
a) Constant (and consistent) warning times, independent of train speed or acceleration/deceleration
b) For trains making station stops prior to crossings, delayed activation of the warning devices until the
train is ready to depart the station
c) When a train clears a crossing in multiple track areas, continued activation of the warning devices if
a second train would have reactivated the devices within a predefined time interval
d) Advance warning for priority control of traffic lights or other highway signage, in accordance with
IEEE Std 1570-2002 and/or the AREMA Communications & Signals Manual, Part 3.1.10 [B2].
6.1.16 Restricted route protections
Where specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC system shall include capabilities to prevent a
train from entering a route that is unsafe for movement of that type of train due to mechanical, civil, electri-cal, or other predefined temporary or permanent conditions of the train or route, or through interfaces tointrusion detection devices, platform edge doors (where fitted), and/or other devices capable of detectinghazards that impact route integrity.
6.2 ATO functions
For operation of trains without crews, a CBTC system shall, as a minimum, be capable of providing all ofthe ATO functions as defined in this subclause, to automatically operate trains in accordance with prescribedoperating criteria within the safety constraints imposed by ATP.
For operation of train with crews, the required ATO functions shall be as specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
The CBTC wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data communications interface shall be sufficient to sup-
port all required ATO functions.
6.2.1 Automatic speed regulationThe starting, stopping, and speed regulation of the train as it travels along the track shall be automatically
controlled by a CBTC system so that the speed, acceleration, deceleration, and jerk rates are within specifiedpassenger comfort limits (as defined by the authority having jurisdiction) and the train speed is below theoverspeed limits imposed by ATP. 
Station stopping accuracy shall be as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.A CBTC system shall support multiple ATO speeds, acceleration, and service brake rates in accordance with
the train operator (if present) or ATS inputs.
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
24 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.6.2.2 Platform berthing control
A CBTC system shall be capable of implementing any of the following platform berthing control modes:
a) Where the platform length is approximately equal to the train length, a CBTC system shall allow a
train to enter a station platform only if there is sufficient room to fully berth or if the preceding train
has a movement authority that shall allow it to fully leave the platform area and it has begun to moveout of the station (i.e., within ATP constraints, train movement shall be controlled to minimize thelikelihood of the train coming to a stop when only partially within the station platform limits).
b) Where the platform length is longer than the train length, a CBTC system shall support multiple
stopping positions within the platform area, as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.
c) Where the platform length supports multiple train berthings, a CBTC system shall allow a train to
enter a platform while another train already occupies an alternative berth.
d) Where the platform length is shorter than the train length, a CBTC system shall support platform
berthings consistent with the door opening control protection interlocks of 6.1.8.
6.2.3 Door control
A CBTC system shall be capable of automatically controlling train doors (and platform edge doors, where
fitted) during passenger boarding and discharging. 
As defined by the authority having jurisdiction, automatic door control may be limited to the following: 
a) Automatic door opening only (with or without passenger door open requests) 
b) Automatic door closing only c) Neither automatic door opening nor closing 
If automatic platform edge doors are provided, they shall be controlled as a set with the matching train doors
such that the train and matching platform edge doors open and close together. It shall be possible to manu-ally disable the operation of any door set (both the train and the matching platform edge door) withoutaffecting the automatic operation of other door sets. The amount of time the train is to remain in the stationwith doors open may be established by ATS (6.3.5.1) and automatically controlled by ATO.
6.3 ATS functions
6.3.1 General
If specified by the authority having jurisdiction, a CBTC may interface to, or be integrated with, an ATS
system. Under such circumstances, and to the extent specified by the authority having jurisdiction, CBTC-related ATS functions shall be implemented as defined in this subclause in order to benefit from thecharacteristics of a CBTC system as defined in 4.1, namely, the availability of the following:
— Train location information to a high precision, independent of track circuits
— Continuous wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data communications link
— Train-borne and wayside data processing capabilities
The CBTC-related ATS functions defined in this subclause shall be fully integrated with other conventionalATS functions and other non-ATS functions, as may be specified by the authority having jurisdiction, tosupport overall service management for the transit system and provide for a single consistent user interface.
The CBTC data communications network, inclusive of the wayside-to-train and train-to-wayside data com-
munications interface, shall be sufficient to support those CBTC-related ATS functions specified by theauthority having jurisdiction.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 256.3.2 ATS user interface
Each ATS user interface shall display all information and implement all control actions, as defined in 6.3,
within acceptable latencies as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
Mandatory display data and user information inputs shall be in accordance with IEEE Std 1474.2-2003.The ATS user shall be able to override any automated CBTC-related ATS functions defined in 6.3.
Certain ATS functions (such as stopping a train en route and the application and removal of temporary speed
restrictions, switch/track blocking, or work zones) can potentially introduce system hazards and the specificimplementation of these functions shall be considered in the hazard analyses required by 5.3.2. ATS func-tions are not required to be implemented in a fail-safe manner; however, the hazard analyses shall take intoaccount, as a minimum, the probability of 
a) Safety-related commands not being executed when initiated by an ATS user,
b) The CBTC system prematurely removing safety-related commands initiated by an ATS user,c) The CBTC system executing safety-related commands that were not initiated by an ATS user,d) Incorrect information being displayed by the CBTC system to the ATS user.
The hazard analyses shall give due consideration of the specific transit application and whether the trains are
operated with or without crews. 
Control action confirmation shall be provided for any safety-related user interfaces/inputs and functions
whose inadvertent implementation could have an adverse operational impact, as defined by the authorityhaving jurisdiction.
6.3.3 CBTC train identification and train trackingEach CBTC-equipped train operating within CBTC territory shall be assigned a train identification. This
train identification shall indicate the type of train and other pertinent information about the train.
An ATS system shall have the capability to automatically track, maintain records of, and display on the ATS
user interface the locations, identities, train schedule, and other pertinent data for all CBTC-equipped trainsoperating in the CBTC territory. The front and rear position of trains shall be tracked based on CBTC trainlocation reports, and the train location shall be displayed on the ATS user interface. Variations in trainlength may be displayed either proportionally or as a standard length icon supplemented by textual trainlength data.
6.3.4 Train routingAn ATS system shall have the capability to permit CBTC-equipped trains operating in CBTC territory to be
manually and automatically routed based on CBTC train location reports and in accordance with the trainservice data, predefined routing rules, and any ATS user-directed service strategy. Where applicable to thespecific track configuration, automatic routing shall facilitate the proper merging and diverging of trains atjunctions, turn back of trains, the movement of trains from/to storage areas, and the rerouting of trains inresponse to service disruptions and/or planned outages. Train routes shall be indicated on the ATS userinterface and may also be indicated to the train operator and/or conductor, if present, on their displays, asspecified by the authority having jurisdiction.
An ATS system may also include a means to control and limit movement authorities of CBTC-equipped
trains operating in CBTC territory. CBTC movement authority limits shall be capable of being displayed onthe ATS user interface, and any uncommanded reductions of authority limits shall be alarmed. For trains
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
26 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.operated with crews, movement authority limits may also be indicated to the train operator and/or conductor
on their displays, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
6.3.5 Automatic train regulation6.3.5.1 Schedule/headway regulation
An ATS system may have the capability to automatically monitor and regulate the performance of CBTC-
equipped trains operating in CBTC territory, in relation to schedule and/or headway adherence.
An ATS system may include an automatic dispatching function (based on train identities, CBTC train
location reports, scheduled and actual headways between trains, and service strategies implemented byauthorized ATS users).
Schedule and headway regulation for CBTC-equipped trains shall be by means of dwell time variance
(including train holds) and may also be by control of run times between stations (e.g., through adjustmentsto train acceleration and service brake rates, and speeds), as specified by the authority having jurisdiction.For trains operated with crews, the desired station departure time and desired speed profile between stationsmay be indicated to the train operator and/or conductor on their displays and, when operating in ATO mode,shall be implemented automatically by a CBTC system using the automatic speed regulation function of6.2.1.
An ATS system may provide the capability to adjust the train service braking profiles for CBTC-equipped
trains (e.g., in response to wet rail conditions). A CBTC system shall coordinate implementation ofrequested changes in service braking profiles to avoid conditions that would result in an emergency brakeapplication.
6.3.5.2 Junction managementAn ATS system may include automatic train regulation functions, based on CBTC train location reports, to
facilitate appropriate train meets (such as transfers between local and express tracks, and at the merge pointbetween different lines) in order to minimize overall system delays.
6.3.5.3 Energy optimizationAn ATS system may have the capability to implement energy optimization algorithms for CBTC-equipped
trains through the real-time control and coordination of train acceleration, train coasting, and train braking.The priority given to energy optimization versus schedule/headway regulation shall be as specified by theauthority having jurisdiction.
6.3.6 Station stop functions6.3.6.1 Stop train at next stationAn ATS system may include the means to direct a single CBTC-equipped train or a group of CBTC-
equipped trains to stop at the next station, even if the train is scheduled to bypass that station. For trainsoperated with crews, a CBTC system may indicate the ATS train stop information to the train operator andconductor on their displays. In ATO mode, a CBTC-equipped train shall automatically stop at the nextstation.
6.3.6.2 Hold train at station
For trains operated without crews, an ATS system shall include facilities to hold (and subsequently release)
a CBTC-equipped train at a station. 
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 27For trains operated with crews, this function is optional and shall be as specified by the authority having
jurisdiction. If this function is provided, a CBTC system may indicate the train hold information to the trainoperator and conductor on their displays, and/or prevent a CBTC-equipped train from departing the stationin ATO mode.
6.3.6.3 Skip station stopAn ATS system may include facilities to direct a CBTC-equipped train or group of CBTC-equipped trains to
pass through a station or group of stations without stopping. For trains operated with crews, a CBTC systemmay indicate the skip station information to the train operator and conductor on their displays. In ATOmode, the train shall automatically skip the designated stations.
6.3.6.4 Door control inhibitAn ATS system may include facilities to inhibit (and subsequently permit) CBTC control of the train doors,
in accordance with 6.2.3.
6.3.7 Restricting train operationsThe application and removal of the following functions can potentially introduce system hazards and the
specific implementation of these functions shall be considered in the hazard analyses required by 5.3.2. 
6.3.7.1 Stopping a train en routeAn ATS system shall provide a means to stop a single CBTC-equipped train or group of CBTC-equipped
trains immediately. A CBTC system shall initiate an immediate brake application on the designated trainsand notify the train operator and conductor, if present, via their displays.
6.3.7.2 Temporary speed restrictionsAn ATS system shall include facilities to impose (and remove) temporary speed restrictions for CBTC-
equipped trains operating on any section of track in CBTC territory (see 6.1.3).
6.3.7.3 Switch/track blockingAn ATS system shall include facilities to block (and subsequently unblock) a switch, an exit signal, a route
entry point, or a section of track within CBTC territory. A CBTC system shall prohibit CBTC-equippedtrains from receiving movement authorities over blocked switches not aligned in the required position orinto routes and/or sections of track that have been blocked (see 6.1.2 and 6.1.3).
6.3.7.4 Work zonesAn ATS system shall include facilities to establish (and subsequently remove) temporary work zones for the
protection of work crews and work trains.
A CBTC system shall enforce restricted speeds on approach to and through defined work zones (see 6.1.13).
For trains operated with crews, information indicating that the restriction is due to a work zone shall be dis-played to the train operator and conductor on their displays, and the CBTC system may preclude ATO modeof operation through a work zone.
An ATS system may also provide methods of visually and audibly indicating the approach and direction of
trains along the wayside to warn on-track roadway workers in areas where visibility is restricted.
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
28 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.6.3.8 Passenger information system interfaces
An ATS system may interface with wayside and/or train-borne passenger information systems to trigger
automatic passenger information messages, such as train arrival information, based on CBTC train locationreports. Train-borne passenger information system interfaces shall be in accordance with IEEE Std 1477-1998.
6.3.9 Fault reporting6.3.9.1 CBTC fault reportingFailures and out-of-tolerance conditions detected by, or input to, a CBTC system that can impact the on-time
performance of the transit system or result in some other loss of specific CBTC functionality may be auto-matically indicated on the ATS user interface display. Any alarms shall be categorized and prioritized intocritical and noncritical alarms and logged. All critical alarms shall require acknowledgment. 
6.3.9.2 Train fault reportingTrain-borne CBTC equipment may include interfaces to train-borne subsystems for the purposes of commu-
nicating train health data to the wayside for display on the ATS user interface displays, as specified by theauthority having jurisdiction.
6.4 Interoperability interface requirements
This performance and functional requirements standard does not include interface design standards forinteroperability. Where interoperability requirements are specified by the authority having jurisdiction, itshall be the responsibility of that authority to define the required interoperability interface standards.
NOTE—Examples of interoperability requirements include the following:
— Trains equipped with CBTC equipment furnished by one supplier to be capable of operating in CBTC territory
equipped with wayside CBTC equipment furnished by another supplier
— Wayside equipment furnished by two separate suppliers to communicate with each other in the overlap area andwith common central ATS equipment
—A  basic operating unit with train-borne CBTC equipment furnished by one supplier to be capable of operating
within a train with another basic operating unit equipped with train-borne CBTC equipment furnished byanother supplier
A future CBTC standard may establish interoperability interface requirements.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 29Annex A
(informative) 
Bibliography
[B1] American Public Transit Association’s Manual for the Development of Rail Transit System Safety Pro-
gram Plans, APTA Rail Safety Audit Program, June 1, 1989.
[B2] AREMA Communications & Signals Manual of Recommended Practices, 20047 
— Section 2, Railway Signal Systems
— Section 3.1.10, Recommended Functional/Operational Guidelines for Interconnection Between
Highway Traffic Signals and Highway-Rail Grade Crossing Warning Systems
— Section 16, Vital Circuit and Software Design
— Section 17.1.1, Definition of Terms Used in the Manual Parts in Section 17
— Section 17.3.1, Recommended Safety Assurance Program for Electronic/Software-Based ProductsUsed in Vital Signal Applications
— Section 17.3.3, Recommended Practice for Hardware Analysis for Vital Electronic/Software-BasedEquipment Used in Signal and Train Control Applications
— Section 17.3.5, Recommended Procedure for Hazard Identification and Management of Vital Elec-tronic/Software-Based Equipment Used in Signal and Train Control Applications
[B3] ASCE 21-96 (Rev 1997), Automated People Mover Standards—Part 1.
8
[B4] IEEE 100, The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms,  Seventh Edition.9
7AREMA publications are available from the American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association, 8201 Corporate 
Drive, Suite 1125, Landover, MD 20785-2230 USA (www.arema.org/).
8ASCE standards are available from the American Society of Civil Engineers, 1015 15th Street NW, Suite 600, Washington DC 20005 
USA (www.asce.org/).
9IEEE publications are available from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ  08854,
USA (http://standards.ieee.org/).
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
30 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.Annex B
(informative) 
Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system
Figure B.1—Example functional block diagram for a typical CBTC system
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 31Annex C
(informative) 
Typical CBTC parameters
Table C.1 provides typical ranges for certain CBTC parameters for general guidance only. Parameter values
for a specific application and/or a specific CBTC system design should be established by the authority hav-ing jurisdiction and/or the supplier, with due consideration of all relevant factors for the specific application.
 Table C.1—Typical CBTC parameters
Parameter Typical range
Maximum number of trains that can be processed by a single wayside controller 10 to 40 trains
Resolution of measured train location (i.e., as reported to establish movement 
authority limits for a following train for ATP purposes)± 0.25 m to ± 6.25 m
(± 10 in to ± 20 ft)
Accuracy of measured train location during normal (non-degraded) operations (i.e., maximum error in reported train location for ATP purposes)± 5 m to ± 10 m
(± 16 ft to ± 33 ft)
Accuracy of measured train location for programmed station stop (ATO) purposes—without platform edge doors± 0.25 m (± 10 in)
Accuracy of measured train location for programmed station stop (ATO) purposes—with platform edge doors± 0.05 m (± 2 in)
Resolution of train movement authority limits ± 0.25 m to ± 6.25 m
(± 10 in to ± 20 ft)
Resolution of train speed measurement for ATP purposes ± 0.5 km/h to ± 2 km/h
(± 0.3 mi/h to ± 1.25 mi/h)
Accuracy of train speed measurement for ATP purposes ± 3 km/h (± 2 mi/h)
Resolution of train speed commands (e.g., civil speed limits) ±0.5 km/h to ± 5 km/h
(± 0.3 mi/h to ± 3 mi/h)
Train-to-wayside message communication delays 0.5 s to 2 s (nominal)Wayside-to-train message communication delays 0.5 s to 2 s (nominal)Wayside CBTC equipment reaction times 0.07 s to 1 s (nominal)Train-borne CBTC equipment reaction times 0.07 s to 0.75 s (nominal)Rollback detection criteria 0.5 m to 2 m (± 20 in to ± 6.5 ft)Zero speed detection criteria < 1 km/h to <3 km/h for 2 s
(< 0.6 mi/h to < 2 mi/h for 2 s)
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
32 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.Annex D
(informative) 
Typical safe braking model
D.1 Introduction
A typical safe braking model for CBTC systems is illustrated in Figure D.1.   
It should be noted that Figure D.1 is not drawn to scale, but is a simplistic representation to assist in the
understanding of a typical CBTC safe braking model. It should also be noted that the safe braking modeloutlined here is defined for level tangent track and would need to be adjusted for grades.
In Figure D.1, the emergency brake curve  is the worst-case, open-loop, speed/distance curve a train will fol-
low once the ATP has initiated an emergency brake application. This emergency brake curve must always
be less than or equal to the safe speed curve,  where safe speed  is defined as the speed above which a critical
hazard (derailment or collision) could occur.
In this model, safety factors are accounted for in the emergency brake curve, train position uncertainties, and
other additional measurement tolerances incorporated in the CBTC system design, and there is no require-ment to add additional safety margins.
The ATP overspeed detection curve  is the speed-distance curve that the ATP subsystem uses to immediately
initiate an emergency brake application, if the ATP subsystem detects that the measured speed exceeds this
curve at the measured train location. When the ATP subsystem has initiated an emergency brake application,the ATP subsystem is no longer in the control loop, and the train will emergency brake at or below theemergency brake curve. The emergency brake curve includes an initial propulsion runaway  period, until
propulsion is disabled.
The ATP profile curve  is the speed-distance curve that is an ATP overspeed allowance  below the ATP over-
speed detection curve. The ATP profile is the base curve used by the ATP subsystem.
D.2 Train-borne CBTC response time (A)
In Figure D.1, it is assumed that the CBTC system will measure the train speed and train location (relative to
its movement authority limit) and compare the measure speed with the ATP profile speed at that measurelocation, every A seconds (worst case).
In Figure D.1, point X represents the situation where the CBTC measured speed is just below the ATP over-speed detection curve at the ATP measure location, i.e., although the ATP measured speed is above the ATPprofile, it is still within the ATP overspeed allowance. As such, the CBTC system will not initiate emer-gency braking.
However, because of worst-case speed and location measurement errors (position uncertainty), it is possible
that the actual speed and actual location of the train could be a point Y.
At this point in time, although the train operator and/or ATO subsystem would normally be attempting to
bring the train speed down to the ATP profile speed, it is assumed that a failure occurs that results in thetrain accelerating rather than braking.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 33A seconds later, this situation will be detected by the CBTC system (point Z in Figure D.1), as the CBTC
measured speed will now clearly be in excess of the ATP overspeed detection curve, and the CBTC system
will immediately initiate an open-loop emergency brake application.
The speed at point Z therefore represents the maximum speed that a train can achieve above the ATP profile
due to CBTC system’s worst-case response times and measurement errors.
At this point, the remaining contributions to the safe braking model are determined by the vehicle character-
istics only.
D.3 Propulsion disable response time (B)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled B in Figure D.1), the train continues to accelerateuntil the train propulsion system has been disabled in response to the CBTC system initiating an emergencybrake application.
D.4 Coast time (C)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled C in Figure D.1), the train is assumed to be coast-ing at the maximum speed achieved as a result of the train accelerating prior to propulsion being disabled.This component of the safe braking model ends when emergency braking begins to take effect.
D.5 Emergency brake build-up time (D)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled D in Figure D.1), the emergency brake rate willbuild up from zero to at least the GEBR. 
D.6 Emergency braking at GEBR (E)
During this component of the safe braking model (labeled E in Figure D.1), the train continues to decelerateat the GEBR until the train comes to zero speed.
Note—The components D and E may be integrated into an equivalent single brake curve.
D.7 Position uncertainty
The safe braking model must include the maximum distance due to measurement inaccuracy by the CBTCsystem for both the leading and following train. 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
34 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.
Figure D.1—Typical safe braking model
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 35Annex E
(normative) 
System Safety Program requirements 
E.1 System Safety Program Plan (SSPP)
E.1.1 Purpose
The SSPP shall describe, in detail, tasks and activities of system safety management and system safety engi-
neering required to identify, evaluate, and eliminate/control hazards or reduce the associated risk to a levelacceptable to the authority having jurisdiction throughout the system life cycle.
E.1.2 Description
An SSPP shall be developed to provide a basis of understanding as to how the System Safety Program willbe accomplished to meet safety requirements. The approved plan shall, on an item-by-item basis, accountfor all required tasks and responsibilities. The SSPP shall include the following elements.
E.1.2.1 Program scope and objectives 
Each SSPP shall describe, as a minimum, the five elements of an effective System Safety Program: defini-
tion of the safety tasks, a planned approach for task accomplishment, qualified people to accomplish tasks,authority to implement tasks through all levels of management, and appropriate commitment of resources(both staffing and funding) to assure tasks are completed. The SSPP shall define a program to satisfy thesystem safety requirements. This section shall
a) Describe the scope of the overall program and the related System Safety Program.
b) List the tasks and activities of system safety management and engineering; describe the
interrelationships between system safety and other functional elements of the program; list the other
program requirements and tasks applicable to system safety, and identify where they are specified ordescribed.
c) Account for all contractually required safety tasks and responsibilities. A matrix shall be provided to
correlate requirements to the location in the SSPP where the requirement is addressed.
E.1.2.2 System safety organization
The SSPP shall describe the following:
a) The system safety organization or function within the organization of the total program using charts
to show the organizational and functional relationships and lines of communication. It shall also
show the organizational relationship between other functional elements having responsibility fortasks with system safety impacts and the system safety management and engineering organization. Itshall identify the review and approval authority of applicable tasks by system safety. 
b) The responsibility and authority of system safety personnel, other contractor organizational
elements involved in the system safety effort, subcontractors, and system safety groups. It shallidentify the methods by which safety personnel may raise issues of concern directly to the programmanager or the program manager’s supervisor within the corporation, the organizational unitresponsible for executing each task, and the authority in regard to resolution of all identifiedhazards.
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
36 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.c) The staffing of the system safety organization for the duration of the contract to include manpower
loading, control of resources, and a summary of the qualifications of key system safety personnel
assigned to the effort, including those who possess coordination/approval authority for contractorprepared documentation.
d) The procedures by which the contractor will integrate and coordinate the system safety efforts,
including assignment of the system safety requirements to action organizations and subcontractors,coordination of subcontractor System Safety Programs, integration of hazard analyses, program anddesign reviews, program status reporting, and system safety groups.
e) The process through which contractor management decisions will be made, including timely
notification of unacceptable risks, necessary action, incidents or malfunctions, waivers to safetyrequirements, program deviations, etc.
f) Details of how resolution and action relative to system safety will be effected at the program
management level possessing resolution authority.
E.1.2.3 System Safety Program milestones
The SSPP shall
a) Define System Safety Program milestones. It shall relate these to major program milestones,
program element responsibility, and required inputs and outputs.
b) Provide a program schedule of safety tasks, including start and completion dates, reports, and
reviews.
c) Identity subsystem, component, and software safety activities as well as integrated system level
activities (i.e., design analyses, tests, and demonstrations) applicable to the System Safety Program,
but specified in other engineering studies and development efforts to preclude duplication.
d) Provide the estimated manpower loading required to complete each task.
E.1.2.4 General system safety requirements and criteria
The SSPP shall describe the following:
a) General engineering requirements and design criteria for safety. It shall include safety requirements
for support equipment and operational safety requirements for all appropriate phases of the life cycle
up to, and including, disposal. It shall list the safety standards and system specifications containingsafety requirements that shall be complied with, and include titles, dates, and where applicable,paragraph numbers.
b) Risk assessment procedures. It shall include the hazard severity categories, hazard probability
levels, and the system safety precedence that shall be followed to satisfy the safety requirements ofthe program. It shall state any qualitative or quantitative measures of safety to be used for riskassessment, including a description of the acceptable/unacceptable risk levels, and include systemsafety definitions that modify, deviate from, or are in addition to those in this standard.
c) Closed-loop procedures for taking action to resolve identified unacceptable risk, including those
involving nondevelopmental items. 
E.1.2.5 Hazard analysis
The SSPP shall describe the following:
a) The analysis techniques and formats to be used in qualitative or quantitative analysis to identify
hazards, their causes and effects, hazard elimination, or risk reduction requirements and how those
requirements are met.
b) The depth within the system to which each technique is used, including hazard identification
associated with the system, subsystem, components, software, hazardous materials, personnel,
ground support equipment, nondevelopmental items, facilities and their interrelationship in the
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 37logistic support, training, maintenance, operational, and disposal (including render safe and
emergency disposal) environments.
c) The integration of subcontractor hazard analyses with overall system hazard analyses.
d) Efforts to identify and control hazards associated with materials used during the system’s life cycle.
E.1.2.6 System safety data 
The SSPP shall
a) Describe the approach for collecting and processing pertinent historical hazard data, mishap data,
and safety lessons-learned data.
b) Identify deliverable data by title and number, and means of delivery (e.g., hard copy, electronically).
c) Identify nondeliverable system safety data and describe the procedures for accessibility by the
authority having jurisdiction and retention of data of historical value.
E.1.2.7 Safety verification
The SSPP shall describe the following:
a) The verification (test, analysis, inspection, etc.) requirements for ensuring that safety is adequately
demonstrated. It shall identify any certification requirements for software, safety devices, or other
special safety features (e.g., render safe and emergency disposal procedures). 
b) Procedures for making sure safety-related verification information is transmitted to the authority
having jurisdiction for review and analysis.
c) Procedure for ensuring the safe conduct of all tests.
E.1.2.8 Audit program
The SSPP shall describe the techniques and procedures to be employed to make sure the objectives and
requirements of the System Safety Program are being accomplished.
E.1.2.9 TrainingThe SSPP shall describe the safety training for engineering, technician, operating, and maintenance
personnel.
E.1.2.10 Incident reportingThe contractor shall describe in the SSPP the mishap/incident alerting/notification, investigation, and report-
ing process, including notification of the authority having jurisdiction.
E.1.2.11 System safety interfacesThe SSPP shall identify, in detail, the following:
a) The interface between system safety, systems engineering, and all other support disciplines, such as
maintainability, quality control, reliability, software development, human factors engineering,
medical support (health hazard assessments), and any others
b) The interface between system safety and all system integration and test disciplines
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
38 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.E.2 Preliminary hazard analysis (PHA)
E.2.1 Purpose
The PHA shall identify safety-critical areas, provide an initial assessment of hazards, and identify requisite
hazard controls and follow-on actions.
E.2.2 Description
A PHA shall be performed and documented to obtain an initial risk assessment of a concept or system.Based on the best available data, including mishap data (if assessable) from similar systems and other les-
sons learned, hazards associated with the proposed design or function shall be evaluated for hazard severity,
hazard probability, and operational constraint. Safety provisions and alternatives needed to eliminate haz-ards or reduce their associated risk to a level acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction shall beincluded. The PHA shall consider the following for identification and evaluation of hazards, as a minimum:
a) Hazardous components (e.g., fuels, propellants, lasers, toxic substances, hazardous construction
materials, pressure systems, and other energy sources).
b) Safety-related interface considerations among various elements of the system (e.g., material
compatibilities, electromagnetic interference, inadvertent activation, fire/explosive initiation and
propagation, and hardware and software controls). This shall include consideration of the potential
contribution by software (including software developed by other contractors/sources) to subsystem/
system mishaps. Safety design criteria to control safety-critical software commands and responses(e.g., inadvertent command, failure to command, untimely command or responses, inappropriate
magnitude, or other designated undesired events) shall be identified and appropriate action taken to
incorporate them in the software (and related hardware) specifications.
c) Environmental constraints, including the operating environments (e.g., drop, shock, vibration,
extreme temperatures, noise, exposure to toxic substances, health hazards, fire, electrostaticdischarge, lightning, electromagnetic environmental effects).
d) Operating, test, maintenance, built-in-tests, diagnostics, and emergency procedures (e.g., human
factors engineering, human error analysis of operator functions, tasks, and requirements; effect of
factors, such as equipment layout, lighting requirements, potential exposures to toxic materials;
effects of noise or radiation on human performance). Those test-unique hazards that will be a direct
result of the test and evaluation of the article or vehicle.
e) Facilities, real property installed equipment, support equipment (e.g., provisions for storage,
assembly, checkout, proof/testing of hazardous systems/assemblies that may involve toxic,
flammable, explosive, corrosive, or cryogenic materials/wastes; radiation or noise emitters;electrical power sources), and training (e.g., training and certification pertaining to safety operationsand maintenance).
f) Safety-related equipment, safeguards, and possible alternate approaches (e.g., interlocks; system
redundancy; fail-safe design considerations using hardware or software controls; subsystem
protection; fire detection and suppression systems; personal protective equipment; heating,
ventilation, and air-conditioning; and noise or radiation barriers).
g) Malfunctions to the system, subsystems, or software. Each malfunction shall be specified, the
causing and resulting sequence of events determined, the degree of hazard determined, and
appropriate specification and /or design changes developed.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 39E.3 Subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA)
E.3.1 Purpose
The SSHA shall verify subsystem compliance with safety requirements contained in subsystem specifica-
tions and other applicable documents; identify previously unidentified hazards associated with the design ofsubsystems, including component failure modes, critical human error inputs, and hazards resulting fromfunctional relationships between components and equipment comprising each subsystem; recommendactions necessary to eliminate identified hazards or control their associated risk to acceptable levels.
E.3.2 Description
An SSHA shall be performed and documented to identify all components and equipment that could result ina hazard or whose design does not satisfy safety requirements. Areas to consider are performance, perfor-mance degradation, functional failures, timing errors, design errors or defects, or inadvertent functioning.The human shall be considered a component within a subsystem, receiving both inputs and initiating out-puts, during the conduct of this analysis.
The analysis shall include a determination
a) Of the modes of failure, including reasonable human errors as well as single-point and common-
mode failures, and the effects on safety when failures occur in subsystem components.
b) Of potential contribution of hardware and software (including that which is developed by other
contractors/sources) events, faults, and occurrences (such as improper timing) on the safety of the
subsystem.
c) That the safety design criteria in the hardware, software, and facilities specification(s) have been
satisfied.
d) That the method of implementation of hardware, software, and facilities design requirements and
corrective actions has not impaired or decreased the safety of the subsystem nor has it introducedany new hazards or risks.
e) Of the implementation of safety design requirements from top level specifications to detailed design
specifications for the subsystem. The implementation of safety design requirements developed aspart of the PHA shall be analyzed to ensure that it satisfies the intent of the requirements.
f) Of test plan and procedure recommendations to integrated safety testing into the hardware and
software test programs.
g) That system level hazards attributed to the subsystem are analyzed and that adequate control of the
potential hazard is implemented in the design.
When software to be used in conjunction with the subsystem is being developed, the contractor performingthe SSHA shall monitor, obtain, and use the output of each phase of the formal software development pro-cess in evaluating the software contribution to the SSHA. 
The SSHA shall be updated as a result of any system design changes, including software design changes,
that affect system safety.
E.4 System hazard analysis (SHA)
E.4.1 Purpose
The SHA shall 
a) Verify system compliance with safety requirements contained in system specifications and other
applicable documents. 
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
40 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.b) Identify previously unidentified hazards associated with the subsystem interfaces and system
functional faults. 
c) Assess the risk associated with the total system design, including software, and specifically of the
subsystem interfaces. 
d) Recommend actions necessary to eliminate identified hazards and/or control their associated risk to
acceptable levels.
E.4.2 Description
An SHA shall be performed and documented to identify hazards and assess the risk of the total system
design, including software, and specifically of the subsystem interfaces.
This analysis shall include a review of subsystem interrelationships for the following:
a) Compliance with specified safety design criteria
b) Possible independent, dependent, and simultaneous hazardous events including systems failures;
failures of safety devices; common cause failures and events; and system interactions that could
create a hazard or result in an increase in mishap risk
c) Degradation in the safety of a subsystem or the total system from normal operation of another
subsystem
d) Design changes that affect subsystems
e) Effects of reasonable human errorsf) Determination
1) Of potential contribution of hardware and software (including that which is developed by other
contractors/sources, or commercial off-the-shelf hardware or software) events, faults, and
occurrences (such as improper timing) on safety of the system.
2) That the safety design criteria in the hardware, software, and facilities specification(s) have
been satisfied.
3) That the method of implementation of the hardware, software, and facilities design require-
ments and corrective actions has not impaired or degraded the safety of the system nor has itintroduced any new hazards.
The SHA may be combined with and/or performed using similar techniques to those used for the SSHA.
When software to be used in conjunction with the system is being developed, the contractor performing the
SHA shall monitor, obtain, and use the output of each phase of the formal software development process inevaluating the software contribution to the SHA.
The SHA shall be updated as a result of any system design changes including software design changes that
affect system safety.
E.5 Operating and support hazard analysis (O&SHA)
E.5.1 Purpose
The O&SHA shall evaluate activities for hazards or risks introduced into the system by operational and sup-
port procedures and evaluate adequacy of operational and support procedures used to eliminate, control, or
abate identified hazards or risks.
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 41E.5.2 Description
An O&SHA shall be performed and documented to examine procedurally controlled activities. The O&SHA
identifies and evaluates hazards resulting from the following:
— The implementation of operations or tasks performed by persons, considering the planned system
configuration/state at each phase of activity 
— The facility interfaces; the planned environments (or ranges thereof) 
— The supporting tools or other equipment, including software controlled automatic test equipment,
specified for use; operational/task sequence, concurrent task effects and limitations 
— The potential for unplanned events, including hazards introduced by human errors 
The human shall be considered an element of the total system, receiving both inputs and initiating outputsduring the conduct of this analysis. The O&SHA must identify the safety requirements (or alternatives)needed to eliminate or control identified hazards or to reduce the associated risk to a level that is acceptableunder either regulatory or contractually specified criteria.
The analysis shall identify the following:
a) Activities that occur under hazardous conditions, their time periods, and the actions required to
minimize risk during these activities/time periods
b) Changes needed in functional or design requirements for system hardware/software, facilities,
tooling, or support/test equipment to eliminate or control hazards or reduce associated risks
c) Requirements for safety devices and equipment, including personnel safety and life support
equipment
d) Warnings, cautions, and special emergency procedures, including those necessitated by failure of a
computer software-controlled operation, to produce the expected and required safe result or
indication
e) Requirements for packaging, handling, storage, transportation, maintenance, and disposal of
hazardous materials
f) Requirements for safety training and personnel certification
g) Effects of nondevelopmental hardware and software across the interface with other system
components or subsystems
h) Potentially hazardous system states under operator control
The O&SHA shall document system safety assessment of procedures involved in system production,
deployment, installation, assembly, test, operation, maintenance, servicing, transportation, storage, modifi-cation, and disposal.
The contractor shall update the O&SHA as a result of any system design or operational changes.
E.6 Risk assessment
The hazard resolution process shall be initiated by defining the physical and functional characteristics of the
system to be analyzed. These characteristics shall be presented in terms of the major elements that make upthe system and its environment, including equipment, facilities, procedures, and people.
The hazards shall be identified. The techniques and methods used to identify the hazards shall include the
following:
a) Data from previous accidents or operating experience
b) Expert opinion and hazard scenarios
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
42 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.c) Checklists of potential hazards
d) Previous hazard analysese) Other analysis techniques as appropriate
All identified hazards shall be assessed in terms of the severity or consequence of the hazard and the proba-
bility of occurrence. 
Risk assessment estimates (see Table E.1) shall be used as the basis in the decision-making process to deter-
mine whether individual system or subsystem hazards shall be eliminated, mitigated, or accepted. Hazardsshall be resolved through a design process that emphasizes the elimination of the hazard. Resolution strate-gies or countermeasures to be employed, listed in order of decreasing preference, shall be the following:
1) Design to eliminate hazards
2) Design to control hazards3) Use safety devices4) Use warning devices5) Implement special procedures 6) Accept the hazard7) Eliminate the system/subsystem/equipment
This process shall include full documentation of the hazard resolution activities. The effectiveness of the
countermeasures shall be monitored to determine that no new hazards are introduced. In addition, wheneversubstantive changes are made to the system, analyses shall be conducted to identify and resolve any newhazards.
Table E.1 provides an example of the relationship between risk, severity, and probability as it may be
applied when assessing CBTC systems. The authority having jurisdiction may choose to modify this table toreflect existing procedures or requirements.
Table E.1—Risk assessment
Hazard severity
Frequency of 
occurrence1—Catastrophic 2—Critical 3—Marginal 4—Negligible
A—Frequent Unacceptable (1A) Unacceptable (2A) Unacceptable (3A) Undesirable (4A) 
B—Probable Unacceptable (1B) Unacceptable (2B) Undesirable (3B) Acceptable with 
review (4B)
C—Occasional Unacceptable (1C) Unacceptable (2C) Acceptable with 
review (3C)Acceptable with 
review (4C)
D—Remote Unacceptable (1D) Unacceptable (2D) Acceptable with 
review (3D)Acceptable without review (4D)
E—Improbable Undesirable (1E) Undesirable (2E) Acceptable without 
review (3E)Acceptable without review (4E)
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 43Residual risk levels
Unacceptable  (1A/B/C/D, 2A/B/C/D, and 3A)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered unacceptable; hazards must be
mitigated through fail-safe designs.
Undesirable  (1E, 2E, 3B, and 4A)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered undesirable; depending oneconomic and functional requirements, CBTC systems with hazards rated at this risk level may beconsidered acceptable with explicit agreement from the authority having jurisdiction.
Acceptable with review  (3C/D and 4B/C)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered acceptable with review; depend-ing on economic and functional requirements, CBTC systems with hazards rated at this risk levelmay be considered acceptable with notification to the authority having jurisdiction.
Acceptable without review (3E and 4D/E)
CBTC systems with residual risks rated at this level are considered acceptable without review; addi-tional design effort or system revision is not required to reduce the severity or probability of hazardswith this risk level.
Frequency of occurrence
A—Frequent = Likely to occur frequently; MTBHE is less than 1000 operating hours.B—Probable = Will occur several times in the life of an item; MTBHE is equal to or greater than
1000 operating hours and less than 100 000 operating hours.
C—Occasional = Likely to occur some time in the life of an item; MTBHE is equal to or greater
than 100 000 operating hours and less than 10 000 000 operating hours.
D—Remote = Unlikely, but possible to occur in the life of an item; MTBHE is equal to or
greater than 10 000 000 operating hours and less than 1 000 000 000 operating
hours.
E—Improbable = So unlikely, it can be assumed occurrence may not be experienced; MTBHE is
equal to or greater than 1 000 000 000 operating hours.
Hazard severity
1—Catastrophic = Fatality, system loss, or severe environmental damage.2—Critical = Severe injury, severe occupational illness, major system or environmental
damage.
3—Marginal = Minor injury, minor occupational illness, or minor system or environmental
damage.
4—Negligible = Less than minor injury, occupational illness, or less than minor system or envi-
ronmental damage.
IEEE
Std 1474.1-2004 IEEE STANDARD FOR COMMUNICATIONS-BASED TRAIN CONTROL (CBTC)
44 Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved.Annex F
(informative) 
Typical approaches to specifying CBTC system availability
F.1 Traditional equipment-based  approach
The traditional approach to defining system availability is the probability that the system is capable of oper-
ating and performing its intended function at a random point in time, as determined by the system MTBFFand MTTRS, as shown in Equation (F.1): 
CBTC system availability = system MTBFF / (system MTBFF + system MTTRS) (F.1)
where 
System MTTRS is the sum of the system MTTR and the mean travel times for maintenance personnel to
travel to the site of a failure.
With this approach, the authority having jurisdiction would typically specify the following:
a) The quantitative CBTC system availability requirements
b) The average travel times to be assumed for maintenance personnel to travel to the site of a failurec) The boundaries of the CBTC system covered by the availability requirementd) The type of CBTC failures to be included in defining the system MTBFF
For a given CBTC system configuration, the predicted CBTC system availability could be determined ana-
lytically from estimates of subsystem MTBFFs and MTTRs.   
Actual CBTC system availability could be determined from measurements of actual in-service system
MTBFF and MTTRS, with appropriate adjustments for factors that are not included within the specifiedboundaries of the CBTC system. 
F.2 Alternative delayed trip-based  approach 
An alternative approach is to define CBTC system availability in terms of the system’s contributions to thedesired on-time performance of the transit system, as shown in Equation (F.2):
CBTC system availability = (F.2)
where
Revenue trip is a scheduled movement of a train, of defined length, from a point of origin to a destination,
t
x is a defined delay threshold,
wx is a weighting factor associated with that delay threshold.
With this approach, CBTC system availability would take into account the delays experienced by
passengers. As the passenger judges transit system availability on the basis of the wait and travel timevariations of the service provided, CBTC system failures that result in longer delays are penalized with a1Σw
xRevenue trips delayed more than tx by CBTC Type failure –
Total scheduled revenue trips------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
IEEE
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS Std 1474.1-2004
Copyright © 2005 IEEE. All rights reserved. 45greater weighting factor than failures that result in shorter delays. In general,  delay thresholds would be
related to the operating headways, as delays at  shorter headways impact on-time performance more
significantly.
The CBTC system availability requirement may also cons ider other failure types, to the extent that such
failures impact fleet ava ilability. For example, even  if a train-borne CBTC eq uipment failure does not
immediately impact the on-time perf ormance of the transit system, it may subsequently result in missed
revenue trips if the failure repair time results in the train being unavailable for service.With this approach, the authority having jurisdiction would typically specify the following:
a) The quantitative CBTC system  availability requirements
b) The various delay thresholds and weighting factors
c) The average travel times to be assumed for maintena nce personnel to travel to the site of a failure
d) The boundaries of the CBTC system cove red by the availability requirements
e) The type of CBTC failures to be incl uded in defining the system availability
For a given CBTC system configuration, the predic ted CBTC system availability could be determined
through computer modeling from estimates of subs ystem MTBFFs and MTTRs, and an assumed system
operating plan.   
Actual CBTC system availability co uld be determined from measuremen ts of actual in-service delays, with
appropriate adjustments for factors that are not in cluded within the specified boundaries of the CBTC
system.