Report 14/2020
November 2020Rail Accident Report
Passenger train collision with a derailed 
locomotive at Bromsgrove
23 March 2020
This investigation was carried out in accordance with: 
l the Railway Safety Directive 2004/49/EC
l the Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003 
l the Railways (Accident Investigation and Reporting) Regulations 2005.
© Crown copyright 2020
 
You may re-use this document/publication (not including departmental or agency logos) free of charge 
in any format or medium. You must re-use it accurately and not in a misleading context. The material 
must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and you must give the title of the source publication.  
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission from the 
copyright holders concerned. This document/publication is also available at www.gov.uk/raib.
Any enquiries about this publication should be sent to:
RAIB Email: enquiries@raib.gov.uk
The Wharf  Telephone: 01332 253300
Stores Road  Website: www.gov.uk/raib
Derby UK 
DE21 4BA  
This report is published by the Rail Accident Investigation Branch, Department for Transport.
Report 14/2020
BromsgroveNovember 2020Preface
The purpose of a Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) investigation is to 
improve railway safety by preventing future railway accidents or by mitigating their 
consequences.  It is not the purpose of such an investigation to establish blame or 
liability. Accordingly, it is inappropriate that RAIB reports should be used to assign 
fault or blame, or determine liability, since neither the investigation nor the reporting 
process has been undertaken for that purpose.
RAIB’s findings are based on its own evaluation of the evidence that was available at 
the time of the investigation and are intended to explain what happened, and why, in a 
fair and unbiased manner. 
Where RAIB has described a factor as being linked to cause and the term is 
unqualified, this means that RAIB has satisfied itself that the evidence supports both 
the presence of the factor and its direct relevance to the causation of the accident or 
incident that is being investigated. However, where RAIB is less confident about the 
existence of a factor, or its role in the causation of the accident or incident, RAIB will 
qualify its findings by use of words such as ‘probable’ or ‘possible’, as appropriate.  
Where there is more than one potential explanation RAIB may describe one factor as 
being ‘more’ or ‘less’ likely than the other.
In some cases factors are described as ‘underlying’. Such factors are also relevant 
to the causation of the accident or incident but are associated with the underlying 
management arrangements or organisational issues (such as working culture).  
Where necessary, words such as ‘probable’ or ‘possible’ can also be used to qualify 
‘underlying factor’.
Use of the word ‘probable’ means that, although it is considered highly likely that the 
factor applied, some small element of uncertainty remains. Use of the word ‘possible’  
means that, although there is some evidence that supports this factor, there remains a 
more significant degree of uncertainty.
An ‘observation’ is a safety issue discovered as part of the investigation that is not 
considered to be causal or underlying to the accident or incident being investigated, 
but does deserve scrutiny because of a perceived potential for safety learning.  
The above terms are intended to assist readers’ interpretation of the report, and to 
provide suitable explanations where uncertainty remains. The report should therefore 
be interpreted as the view of RAIB, expressed with the sole purpose of improving 
railway safety. 
Any information about casualties is based on figures provided to RAIB from various 
sources.  Considerations of personal privacy may mean that not all of the actual 
effects of the event are recorded in the report. RAIB recognises that sudden 
unexpected events can have both short- and long-term consequences for the physical 
and/or mental health of people who were involved, both directly and indirectly, in what 
happened.
RAIB’s investigation (including its scope, methods, conclusions and recommendations) 
is independent of any inquest or fatal accident inquiry, and all other investigations, 
including those carried out by the safety authority, police or railway industry.
Preface
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove4
November 2020This page is intentionally left blank Report 14/2020
BromsgroveNovember 2020
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove5
November 2020Passenger train collision with a derailed 
locomotive at Bromsgrove, 23 March 2020
Contents
Preface  3
Summary  7
Introduction  8
Definitions 8
The accident  9
Summary of the accident  9
Context 9
The sequence of events  14
Analysis  18
Identification of the immediate cause  18
Identification of causal factors  18
Observation 25
Previous occurrences of a similar character  25
Summary of conclusions  26
Immediate cause  26
Causal factors  26
Additional observation   26
Recommendation and learning points  27
Recommendation 27
Learning points 27
Appendices  28
Appendix A - Glossary of abbreviations and acronyms 28
Appendix B - Investigation details 29
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove6
November 2020This page is intentionally left blank
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove7
November 2020Summary
At about 22:44 hrs on Monday 23 March 2020, the 21:05 Cardiff Central to 
Birmingham New Street service collided with a class 66 locomotive that had derailed 
at the end of a siding, south of Bromsgrove station. The passenger train suffered 
significant damage along one side of all three vehicles, although it did not derail. There 
were four passengers and two crew on board the passenger train and none reported 
any injuries.
The locomotive had just arrived in the siding and was to act as a ‘banking’  locomotive, 
assisting heavy freight trains up the 1 in 37 Lickey incline, to the north of Bromsgrove 
station. It derailed after running through the buffer stop at the end of the siding and 
came to rest fouling the main line. The driver of the locomotive was not injured in the 
collision, although the locomotive suffered damage to the corner of the leading cab.
The driver did not stop the locomotive before it reached the buffer stop because he 
became distracted from the driving task by personal issues arising from the national 
COVID-19 lockdown announced earlier that evening. 
The collision occurred because there was insufficient time between the locomotive 
derailment and the passenger train’s arrival for the alarm to be raised and the 
passenger train to be stopped.
RAIB has made one recommendation to Network Rail to review its processes and 
standards for managing buffer stop collision risk on non-platform terminal tracks.
RAIB has also identified three learning points for drivers, relating to compliance with 
mobile phone policies in the driving cab, informing signallers of accidents and safe exit 
from trains during an incident.
Summary
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove8
November 2020Introduction
Definitions
1 Metric units are used in this report, except when it is normal railway practice to 
give speeds and locations in imperial units. Where appropriate the equivalent 
metric value is also given. Railway mileages are referenced to a zero point at 
London Road Junction in Derby. ‘Left’ and ‘right’ are relative to the direction of 
travel of the vehicle being referred to. 
2 The report contains abbreviations explained in Appendix A. Sources of evidence 
used in the investigation are listed in Appendix B. 
Introduction
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove9
November 2020
The accident
Summary of the accident 
3 At about 22:44 hrs on Monday 23 March 2020, a locomotive collided with the 
buffer stop at the end of a siding about 700 metres south of Bromsgrove station. 
The locomotive derailed and came to a stop foul of the adjacent main line. Less 
than a minute later, a northbound passenger train collided with the corner of the 
locomotive, but did not derail. The passenger train came to a stop between the 
locomotive and Bromsgrove station.
4 No-one was hurt. 
5 The passenger train suffered extensive damage to one side of all three vehicles. 
The front left corner of the leading vehicle was particularly damaged in the area 
of the driver’s door. The locomotive suffered damage to the front left corner of the 
leading cab. There was also damage to the underside of the locomotive and this 
resulted in a diesel fuel spill during recovery (figure 1).
6 The buffer stop, and the associated track at the end of the siding, was also 
damaged during the collision. 
Figure 1: The locomotive and the passenger train after the accident (second image courtesy of 
CrossCountry)
Context
Location
7 The accident occurred at 56 miles and 8 chains, at the end of the up Bromsgrove 
neck siding, about 700 metres to the south of Bromsgrove station on the Bristol 
to Birmingham main line (figures 2 and 3). This is a siding which is routinely used 
by locomotives waiting to assist heavy freight trains up the 1:37 Lickey incline, 
a practice referred to as ‘banking’. The siding runs parallel to the up Gloucester 
main line and ends at a buffer stop.
The accident
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove10
November 2020
Location of accident
© Crown Copyright. All rights reserved. Department for Transport 100039241. RAIB 2020
 3 4
12Bromsgrove Lickey incline
To BirminghamTo Bristol
Bromsgrove 
North JunctionBromsgrove 
South JunctionDown Gloucester
Down Gloucester
Up Bromsgrove loop
Up Bromsgrove neckUp GloucesterDown Bromsgrove station loopBA3611
BA7623
NNot to scale
Some lines and features omitted for clarity0B01
1M87Figure 2:  Extract from Ordnance Survey map showing location of accident 
Figure 3: Track layout at Bromsgrove, showing the route of both trains 
8 At this location, the maximum permitted speed on the up Gloucester main line is 
90 mph (144 km/h). The maximum permitted speed on the up Bromsgrove neck 
siding is 15 mph (24 km/h). The siding and main line are on a downhill gradient of 
1 in 283 and a gentle right-hand curve, in the direction of travel of the locomotive. 
9 The signalling in the area is controlled from the Bromsgrove workstation which 
is located at the West Midlands Signalling Centre. Although the line from 
Birmingham as far as Bromsgrove station is electrified, the location of the 
accident is beyond the end of the electrified area. 
Organisations involved
10 DB Cargo (UK) Limited was the owner and operator of the locomotive and the 
employer of the locomotive driver. 
11 XC Trains Limited (trading as CrossCountry) was the operator of the passenger 
train and the employer of the staff on board it. 
12 Network Rail is the owner and maintainer of the railway infrastructure, including 
the siding and buffer stop.  
The accident
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove11
November 202013 DB Cargo, CrossCountry, and Network Rail all freely co-operated with the 
investigation.  
Trains involved
The locomotive
14 The diesel locomotive that derailed, 66057, was part of a small sub-fleet of class 
66 locomotives that had been modified to undertake banking duties on the Lickey 
incline. A banking locomotive is moved against, and sometimes coupled to, the 
rear of trains requiring assistance, in Bromsgrove station (paragraph 7), before 
helping to provide power up the incline. If the banking locomotive has coupled 
to the train, a remote coupler release is operated, disconnecting it on the move, 
when the train has reached the top of the incline. The train then continues, and 
the banking locomotive returns down the incline to Bromsgrove, ready for further 
duties.
15 On the night of the accident the locomotive was due to bank its first freight train 
from Bromsgrove at around midnight.
The passenger train
16 The passenger train was a three-car class 170 ‘Turbostar’ diesel multiple unit, 
number 170107. CrossCountry reported that there were 4 passengers on board at 
the time, including an off-duty DB Cargo driver, as well as two train crew.
17 It was operating service 1M87,1 the 21:05 hrs train from Cardiff Central to 
Birmingham New Street. The train had left Worcestershire Parkway station about 
12 minutes before reaching Bromsgrove, and was running about 2 minutes late. 
Its next scheduled stop was at Birmingham New Street.
Rail equipment/systems involved
18 The buffer stop consisted of a metal framework that was fixed to the jointed rails. 
It did not contain any sliding friction elements or hydraulic buffers. It was fitted 
with two permanently illuminated red lights (figure 4).
19 The buffer stop was installed in its current location (figure 5) around 2004, as 
identified from historic satellite imagery. Prior to this, the siding had ended in a 
buffer stop located about 90 metres further south. 
Staff involved
20 The driver of the locomotive had worked on the railway for 18 years, with 
14 of those driving for DB Cargo and its predecessors. He held the relevant 
competencies for driving class 66 locomotives and his route knowledge for the 
route to Bromsgrove was up-to-date. He regularly worked this shift, operating the 
banking locomotive to and from Bromsgrove. DB Cargo stated that there were no 
significant safety-related incidents on the driver’s record. 
21 The driver of the passenger train had been driving trains for 44 years. 
CrossCountry reported that there were no significant safety-related incidents on 
his record. 
1 An alphanumeric code, known as the ‘train reporting number’, is allocated to every train operating on Network Rail 
infrastructure.
The accident
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove12
November 2020
Up Gloucester line
NFigure 4: Up Bromsgrove neck buffer stop (image 
courtesy of CrossCountry)
Figure 5: Location of the buffer stop (image courtesy of Network Rail)
The accident
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove13
November 2020External circumstances
22 It was dark at the time of the accident. The weather was clear and dry, with 
temperatures of between 2°C and 4°C recorded at local weather stations.
23 There was very little local illumination and no significant sources of noise nearby .
24 It is possible that if the accident had occurred during the hours of daylight, the 
driver might have seen the locomotive slightly earlier, and been able to reduce the 
collision speed a little. However, there is no evidence to suggest that any other 
external circumstances affected the accident.
The accident
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove14
November 2020The sequence of events
Events preceding the accident
25 The locomotive driver had last worked on the previous Saturday, two days before 
the accident. He worked the night shift, getting home at around 08:30 hrs on the 
Sunday morning, and rested until about midday. He spent the rest of the day at 
home, going to bed at around 23:30 hrs.
26 He woke at about 08:00 hrs on the Monday morning and did not try to sleep 
during the day.
27 At 20:30 hrs, the driver watched the Prime Minister make a statement on 
television relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. This was the statement which 
instructed people to stay at home, except for limited, predefined reasons, and that 
no-one was allowed to meet with friends or family unless they lived in the same 
household. Immediately after watching this broadcast, the locomotive driver set 
off to work, which was a 20-minute drive away.
28 While en-route to work, the driver received a phone call from a family 
member and there was a worried discussion about what the earlier televised 
announcement would mean for his childcare arrangements.
29 The driver arrived at Bescot yard, near Walsall, and booked on punctually, by 
telephone, at 21:11 hrs. He prepared the locomotive and departed at 21:32 hrs. 
Although this departure was 27 minutes behind the published schedule, the 
timetable for the journey was such that it was possible to recover this time before 
Bromsgrove. The locomotive travelled via the Sutton Park line before being 
stopped for a few minutes at a red signal at Castle Bromwich curve. At 22:07 hrs, 
after the signal cleared, the driver took the locomotive towards Bromsgrove via St 
Andrews Junction and Kings Norton.
30 After passing Kings Norton, over a period of 11 minutes, the driver received three 
text messages on his personal mobile phone. These were from the same family 
member as the earlier phone call and all related to concerns about childcare 
and the closure of schools. The driver sent four text message replies to these. At 
22:38 hrs he received a picture message showing advice from the school relating 
to school provision, and he sent a text reply. Table 1 and figure 6 show details 
of these timings and the approximate locations at which the messages were 
received.
The sequence of events
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove15
November 2020Time Message Approximate Location
22:24 Text received Kings Heath (44.5 miles)
22:28 Text reply sent After Kings Norton (47.5 miles)
22:29 Text received Northfield (48 miles)
22:31 Text reply sent Longbridge (49 miles)
22:34 Text reply sent Barnt Green (51.5 miles)
22:35 Text received After Barnt Green (52 miles)
22:36 Text reply sent M42 overbridge (53 miles)
22:38 Picture (of text) message received Blackwell Road (53.5 miles)
22:38 Text reply sent After Blackwell Road (54 miles)
22:42 - Bromsgrove station signal
22:43 - Buffer stop
22:44 - Collision with passenger train
Table 1: Detail of message timings on mobile phone, along with later events
31 The locomotive passed signal BA3611 at 22:39:51 hrs at 38 mph (61 km/h), and 
was routed from the down Gloucester line to the up Gloucester and then onto the 
up Bromsgrove loop through the station (figure 3). The train was only two minutes 
behind schedule arriving in the station.
32 The driver slowed the locomotive for the approach to signal BA7623, at the south 
end of the platforms in Bromsgrove station. This signal is approach controlled, 
meaning that it was held at red for a fixed length of time as the train approached 
it, before it cleared to a proceed aspect. This feature is intended to ensure that 
the speed of approaching trains is reduced, because of a speed restriction on 
the route beyond the signal. The signal is also fitted with the Train Protection and 
Warning System (TPWS) which will automatically stop any train passing it at red. 
At 22:42:01 hrs, when signal BA7623 cleared to a proceed aspect, with a route 
set for the up Bromsgrove neck, the driver released the brake and applied a low 
power demand.  The train passed the signal at 6 mph (10 km/h).
33 After passing the signal, the driver’s thoughts returned to the picture message 
that he had received at 22:38 hrs (paragraph 30). At 22:42:43 hrs, while travelling 
at 18 mph (29 km/h), he shut off the power, returning the controller to neutral. At 
this point the locomotive was travelling at less than the maximum permitted speed 
of 30 mph (48 km/h) for the first 350 metres towards the up Bromsgrove neck, 
although this limit subsequently reduced to 15 mph (24 km/h) for the last 350 
metres along the siding itself.
Events during the accident
34 The locomotive coasted for 52 seconds towards and into the up Bromsgrove 
neck. The locomotive’s speed gradually increased on the 1 in 283 downhill 
gradient from 18 mph (29 km/h) to 23 mph (37 km/h). 
35 At 22:43:35 hrs, and with the locomotive 40 metres from the buffer stop, the driver 
became aware of where he was and made an immediate, full application of the 
locomotive’s brakes. Four seconds later, the locomotive collided with the buffer 
stop at approximately 21 mph (34 km/h).
The sequence of events
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove16
November 2020
Messages sentMessages received
Bromsgrove station
Location of collison
Figure 6: Approximate locations of the locomotive when messages were received and sent
The sequence of events
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove17
November 202036 The locomotive tore the buffer stop off the end of the siding, pushing it for about 
20 metres before coming to a stop. The locomotive ran off the end of the track, 
ploughing into the ballast, with only the last two sets of wheels remaining on the 
track. As it ran on, unguided by the track, the locomotive deviated to the left, 
coming to a stop with its front left corner about 600 mm away from the nearest 
running rail of the up Gloucester main line (figure 1). 
37 The locomotive driver got out of the left side of the cab to investigate the 
consequences of the collision. He soon became aware of the sound and lights 
of an approaching passenger train, and realised that he was on an open running 
line. He immediately ran towards the back of the locomotive to get clear of the 
open line.
38 The passenger train, 1M87, was travelling at 85 mph (137 km/h) when it collided 
with the corner of the locomotive at 22:44:26 hrs, approximately 47 seconds after 
the locomotive had collided with the buffer stop.
Events following the accident
39 The driver of the passenger train immediately applied the emergency brake, 
coming to a stop just south of Bromsgrove station. He reported the collision to the 
signaller, who blocked all the lines to trains.
40 Network Rail reported the accident to RAIB at 23:21 hrs.
41 The few passengers on 1M87 were evacuated on foot to Bromsgrove station at 
23:55 hrs. The train was moved to the station at 03:00 hrs on 24 March, ready for 
recovery to Tyseley depot that afternoon.
42 The locomotive was rerailed by 16:00 hrs on 24 March, and left in the siding to 
await recovery to Toton depot. 
43 Network Rail undertook remedial work to remove parts of the buffer stop that 
remained foul of the up Gloucester line. Work was also undertaken to clear up the 
diesel spillage that occurred during recovery of the locomotive. The up and down 
Gloucester lines were reopened to trains at 00:04 hrs on 25 March 2020.  The up 
Bromsgrove neck remained out of use for several days until track repairs were 
completed.
The sequence of events
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove18
November 2020Analysis
Identification of the immediate cause 
44 The locomotive became foul of the main line shortly before the passenger 
service arrived.
45 When the locomotive hit the buffer stop, it continued for approximately 20 metres 
and deviated to the left before coming to a stop. This caused it to foul the up 
Gloucester line, which was open to traffic (paragraph 36). The passenger train 
arrived less than a minute later, and collided with the corner of the locomotive 
(paragraph 38).
Identification of causal factors 
46 The accident occurred due to a combination of the following causal factors:
l The locomotive derailed to a position foul of the main line (paragraph 47).
l There was no opportunity to stop the passenger train before the collision 
(paragraph 72).
Each of these factors is now considered in turn.
Derailment of the locomotive
47 The locomotive derailed to a position foul of the main line.
48 This causal factor arose due to a combination of the following:
l The driver was distracted from the driving task as the locomotive entered the 
siding, resulting in the collision with the buffer stop (paragraph 49).
l The locomotive deviated to the left after collision with the buffer stop 
(paragraph 58).
Each of these factors is now considered in turn.
Driver distraction
49 The driver was distracted from the driving task as the locomotive entered 
the siding, resulting in the collision with the buffer stop.
50 When the driver started work on 23 March, he had just seen the Prime 
Minister’s announcement of the COVID-19 lockdown (paragraph 27). He had 
also had a telephone discussion with a family member about the impact of the 
announcement on childcare arrangements (paragraph 28). These arrangements 
had relied on support from other family members which would be prohibited 
under lockdown.  It was clear to him that this would make it very difficult for him to 
continue to manage his shift working pattern.
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove19
November 202051 The driver stated that it was his normal routine to put his personal mobile phone 
on silent and in his bag, prior to his driving turns, but on this occasion, he forgot 
to do so and it remained, on silent and vibrate, in his pocket. As a result, he was 
alerted to receipt of the messages from the family member and he read and 
replied to them while driving (table 1). The final message he received included 
advice from his childrens’ school that further complicated the childcare issue, and 
the driver also replied to this. This final incoming message occurred about four 
minutes before the locomotive passed the signal at Bromsgrove station and five 
minutes before the collision with the buffer stop.
52 The driver’s use of his personal mobile phone was contrary to the DB Cargo 
‘Mobile Phone Policy’, which states:
‘Personal mobile telephones must not be used whilst in the driving cab, or on or 
about the running line’.
53 The driver was aware of his employer’s policy. However, the fact that the mobile 
phone was vibrating in his pocket, combined with the significant, unresolved 
childcare issue, drew him to read and respond to the mobile phone messages 
while he was driving the locomotive. 
54 When the locomotive passed the signal at Bromsgrove station, the driver applied 
a little power to enter the siding, before removing it and coasting (paragraph 34). 
At this point, his thoughts returned to the last message relating to the school, as 
the childcare problem was still occupying his mind. He sent no further messages, 
but continued to worry about how the childcare issue could be resolved, while the 
locomotive coasted along the siding towards the buffer stop. The result of this was 
that he was temporarily distracted from the driving task while in the siding. It was 
only when the locomotive was about 40 metres away from the buffer stop that 
the driver became aware of his location and immediately made a full application 
of the locomotive’s brakes. However, it was too late to avoid a collision with the 
buffer stop. 
55 Although the driver had been awake for approximately 13 hours before starting 
his shift, there is no evidence to suggest that he was particularly tired at the time 
of the accident. His time awake would have affected his level of fatigue later in 
the shift,2 and RAIB notes that this does not align with good practice in fatigue 
management. However, RAIB does not consider that fatigue contributed to the 
cause of the driver’s distraction on this occasion.
56 DB Cargo’s ‘Fatigue Management Policy’ places responsibility on the employee 
for reporting fatigue issues, either before or during a shift. DB Cargo also stated 
that non-fatigue related ‘fitness for duty’ issues, such as those involving personal 
circumstances, use the same reporting method.  This policy states that:
‘All employees have a duty to report if they feel the onset of fatigue at the 
commencement or at any point during their shift, to the Control Duty Manager.’
2 RAIB has examined first night shift fatigue in its investigation int o an uncontrolled freight train run back at Shap 
(RAIB report 15/2011 ). This also featured in a safety digest into a buffer stop collision at London King’s Cross 
(Safety digest 15/2017 ).
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove20
November 202057 At the time of signing on, which was done remotely by telephone and not 
face- to- face, the driver did not consider that he was fatigued, nor did he consider 
that this was an issue during the journey to Bromsgrove. He also did not consider 
that the emerging childcare issues would affect his ability to drive during his shift. 
As a result, he saw no need to report anything under the fatigue management 
reporting system either before, or during, his shift.
Deviation of the locomotive to the left
58 The locomotive deviated to the left after collision with the buffer stop.
59 The locomotive hit the buffer stop at 21 mph (34 km/h), which was 40% above 
the maximum permitted speed in the up Bromsgrove neck. The result was that 
the locomotive detached the buffer stop from the end of the siding and pushed 
its structure ahead of it. The locomotive ran off the end of the rails and ploughed 
through the ground ahead of it, causing the ballast to pile up. This caused the 
locomotive to slow to a stop. It would also have influenced the direction in which 
the locomotive travelled, with this effect being largely random. In this accident, it 
caused the locomotive to deviate towards the up Gloucester line. 
60 The speed of the locomotive as it hit the buffer stop was sufficient for it to travel 
far enough to become foul of the up Gloucester line before stopping. If the 
locomotive had not exceeded the maximum permitted speed for the siding, it 
would almost certainly not have travelled far enough to foul the main line.
Standards related to the buffer stop
61 When the buffer stop was installed in its current location around 2004, the 
relevant standard for managing buffer stop risks was railway group standard GC/
RT5033 issue one (‘Terminal Tracks - Managing the Risk’). This states that:
‘A length of straight track, greater than the length of the longest vehicle 
permitted to use the track, shall be provided wherever reasonably practicable at 
the approach to the buffer stop, so that any vehicle striking the buffer stop will 
do so with its longitudinal axis at right angles to the buffer beam.’
62 Although there was a very gradual curve to the main line and the parallel siding, 
this was of such a large radius that the locomotive would have still struck the 
buffer stop square on, in line with the intent of this requirement.
63 GC/RT5033 also defined circumstances in which an overrun risk assessment was 
required to be carried out for a buffer stop. This stated:
The risks of harm to people and damage to critical structures arising from a train 
overrun at the following locations shall be assessed:
l terminal or bay platforms 
l terminal tracks on freight lines and sidings used by trains carrying dangerous 
goods 
l where there are significant identified risks to persons or property beyond the 
railway boundary. 
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove21
November 202064 Because the up Bromsgrove neck was not at a station platform, was not used 
by trains carrying dangerous goods and posed no significant risk to those 
outside the railway boundary, there was no requirement to undertake a specific 
overrun risk assessment under this standard. However, there would have still 
been a requirement for the buffer stop installation to have a more general risk 
assessment as required by the general duties associated with the Health and 
Safety at Work etc Act 1974.
65 Network Rail was unable to locate any records from installation of the buffer stop 
in its current location (paragraph 19) to indicate that an overrun risk assessment 
was carried out, nor any findings of more general risk assessments. Bromsgrove 
station was remodelled in 2016, but no changes were made to the buffer stop at 
that time.
66 However, a number of mitigations, of the types suggested in standards relating to 
overrun risk assessment, were present at the up Bromsgrove neck. These were:
l Two permanently lit red lights were fitted to the buffer stop, to aid visibility by 
any approaching trains.
l Imposition of a 15 mph (24 km/h) maximum permitted speed, to manage the 
impact energy in any collision with the buffer stop.
l Normal stopping position for locomotives was more than 50 metres short of the 
buffer stop, managing the risk of trains coming into contact with it.
l Use of an approach-controlled signal on entry to the siding, managing the speed 
of trains entering it.
l The Train Protection and Warning system (TPWS) was fitted at this signal. This 
would have the effect of stopping any trains that pass it at danger , well before 
they reach the buffer stop.
67 The buffer stop was not subject to any specific maintenance regime, as 
defined by Network Rail standard NR/L2/TRK/001 module 18 ‘Inspection and 
Maintenance of Permanent Way – Buffer Stops’. Network Rail did not consider 
the up Bromsgrove neck to be a ‘terminal track on a freight line’, and so a 
specific buffer stop inspection regime was not required by the standard. However , 
Network Rail did expect routine visual inspections of the track to identify any 
significant defects with the buffer stop and to flag these for attention. There is no 
evidence to suggest that there was any defect with the buffer stop at the time of 
the collision.
68 The red lights on the buffer stop were subject to regular inspection by Network 
Rail’s Distribution and Plant team. This included replacement of the lamps every 
six months. Records show that this was being carried out. In addition, CCTV 
from a passing train shows that the buffer stop lighting was illuminated four hours 
before the accident (figure 7), indicating that it was almost certainly lit at the time 
of the accident.
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove22
November 2020
Figure 7: Train CCTV image showing buffer stop light illuminated at 18:47 hrs on 23 March 2020 (image 
courtesy of CrossCountry)
69 The current guidance on risk assessment for buffer stops is described in 
GIGN5633 (paragraph 84). Although intended for platform tracks, the risk 
assessment methodology can be applied to non-platform lines. It considers 
features such as the layout of the terminal track, its collision history, physical 
condition and any surrounding infrastructure and population. The output of the 
assessment is an estimation of the fatality and injury risk, expressed as ‘estimated 
years per fatality’ .3 
70 Although GIGN5633 does not define any action levels relating to this calculated 
risk, its identically titled predecessor standard, GCRC5633, indicated a first action 
level of approximately 3,300 years per equivalent fatality. 
71 RAIB retrospectively applied the methodology of GIGN5633 to the up Bromsgrove 
neck, taking into account the mitigations present and the possibility of a 
passenger train on the adjacent up Gloucester line. This indicated a risk of one 
fatality every 135,000 years, considerably less than the threshold for action 
suggested by the earlier standard.
3 Note that the term ‘fatality’ includes statistically weighted injuries, in line with railway industry standard practice.
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove23
November 2020Operation of the passenger train
72 There was no opportunity to stop the passenger train before the collision.
73 The passenger train, 1M87, was running on clear signals at around 85 mph 
(136 km/h) on the approach to Bromsgrove. There was no possibility that the 
driver of the train could have stopped the train before the collision, even if he had 
applied the brakes on sighting the locomotive’s lights in the dark. Furthermore, 
seeing the lights of a locomotive on the adjacent up Bromsgrove neck would not 
have been a reason for the driver to brake, because locomotives regularly wait 
in the siding. The driver had no idea that the locomotive was foul of his line until 
his train collided with it. However, as his train approached, he became aware of 
a cloud of dust that had been thrown into the air during the derailment, but he did 
not have time to apply the brakes before the collision.
74 The passenger train driver did not receive any warning of the derailed locomotive 
prior to reaching the collision site. Such a warning could have come from the 
signaller, if they had been alerted to the derailment by a GSM-R4 call from the 
locomotive driver. Alternatively, the locomotive driver could have sent a Railway 
Emergency Group Call (REC), which sends a ‘stop all trains’ message to all 
trains in the vicinity. However, the locomotive driver did not contact the signaller 
immediately after the derailment, nor did he initiate a REC. 
75 The passenger train arrived approximately 47 seconds after the locomotive 
collided with the buffer stop (paragraph 38). The locomotive came to a stop about 
four seconds after it hit the buffer stop. A cloud of ballast dust was thrown into 
the air, affecting the driver’s visibility of the surroundings. The driver would then 
have taken a few seconds to recognise what had happened, having only become 
aware of the buffer stop four seconds before colliding with it (paragraph 35). 
76 The locomotive driver’s first action after the collision with the buffer stop was to 
get out of the locomotive to investigate whether it had derailed. He would have 
found this difficult to judge from the cab due to the dust cloud. Exiting the cab on 
a class 66 locomotive involves moving behind the driver’s seat and opening a 
door into a short corridor. The external door then needs to be opened before the 
driver can climb down to ground level. This would probably have taken the driver 
about 20 seconds to complete. It is likely that the driver would only have reached 
the track about 20 seconds before the arrival of the passenger train. Therefore, 
he did not have time to give any warning to the signaller or to initiate a REC. The 
driver only had time to run to the back of the locomotive to get clear of the up 
Gloucester line onto which he had alighted, and on which the passenger train was 
approaching.
4 A radio in the cab of a train based on a digital railway communication system that allows communication between 
drivers and signallers.
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove24
November 202077 Module M1 of the railway Rule Book (GERT8000-M1 ‘Dealing with a train 
accident or train evacuation’) states that in the event of a train accident, the driver 
should take the following actions:
l You must immediately switch on the hazard warning indication where 
provided. 
l If you cannot do this, you must display a red light forward. 
l You must then check:
o if any other lines are obstructed (if in doubt, treat them as obstructed), and 
decide the quickest way to stop any approaching trains 
o the exact location of your train.
l You must tell the signaller about the accident in the quickest way possible and 
whether the electric traction current needs to be switched off.
78 The driver was in a state of shock and confusion having just collided with 
the buffer stop. He has stated that he did not consider the possibility that the 
locomotive was foul of the main line at this time. Therefore, he did not recognise 
that he needed to switch the hazard lights on. Had he switched them on, the 
approaching passenger train would not have seen them until a few seconds 
before the collision. It is possible that this would have caused the passenger train 
driver to apply the brakes. However, although this might have reduced the speed 
of the train before the collision, it would not have prevented it.
79 For the same reasons, the locomotive driver did not turn on the red tail lamps in 
the leading cab, nor show any other red light through the cab window. However, 
had he done so, again, it would have been unlikely to have had any effect on the 
actions of the passenger train driver because locomotives can often be seen to be 
waiting in the up Bromsgrove neck.
80 The driver’s actions in checking what had happened to his locomotive before 
contacting the signaller were consistent with the wording of the Rule Book. RSSB5 
has since reported that an amendment to the Rule Book will come into force in 
December 2020 which will require the driver to inform the signaller of an accident 
before checking if any other lines are affected.
81 The ‘GSM-R Handbook’ (RSSB document RS523) describes the operation and 
functions of the GSM-R radio system fitted in trains and available to signallers and 
operations controllers. Section 5.3 describes the use of the REC in an emergency 
situation. It states:
l A REC can be used during any emergency situation affecting more than one 
line or more than one train. 
l In an emergency situation the driver may need to initiate a REC. 
5 The railway Rule Book is maintained and published by RSSB on behalf of its members. RSSB is a not-for-profit 
body whose members are the companies making up the railway industry , and is registered as Rail Safety and 
Standards Board Ltd, but trades as RSSB.
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove25
November 202082 Although it associates possible use of the REC with emergency situations, the 
handbook does not provide detailed guidance on what situations the REC should 
be used for and those for which it should not. Because a REC sends a ‘ST OP 
EMERGENCY’ message to all trains in the relevant area, there will be situations 
where a REC is appropriate and others where stopping all trains is not necessary. 
DB Cargo stated that its training in the use of the REC uses scenarios to test the 
responses of drivers to emergency situations and the appropriate use of the REC. 
However, it also stated that there is no definitive list of situations where REC 
use is required and the decision is largely down to driver discretion based on the 
circumstances at the time. The locomotive driver did not initially consider that his 
locomotive could be affecting the adjacent line and so did not consider using a 
REC.
Observation
Buffer stop risk assessment
83 The standards and processes that Network Rail applies to assess the risk of 
overrun at buffer stops do not address those on non-platform tracks.
84 Network Rail standard NR/L2/TRK/2102 issue 8 (Design and construction of 
track) requires the use of GC/RT5033 (paragraph 61) for the design of new or 
renewed buffer stops. GC/RT5033 has since been superseded by rail industry 
standard RIS-7016-INS ‘Interface between station platforms, track, trains and 
buffer stops’. This includes the requirements for overrun risk assessment of buffer 
stops. Associated guidance on how to undertake buffer stop risk assessments is 
described in rail industry guidance note GIGN5633 ‘Recommendations for the risk 
assessment of buffer stops and end impact walls’.
85 RIS-7016-INS states that its purpose is to set out ‘requirements for the design 
and maintenance of station platforms for their safe interface with track, trains and 
buffer stops’. Therefore, sidings that are not in station platforms, such as the up 
Bromsgrove neck, are not covered by it. The associated guidance in GIGN5633 is 
linked to RIS-7016-INS and so is also limited to platform tracks.
86 RAIB observes that although earlier standards had some applicability to non-
passenger terminal tracks, the current standards do not. Therefore, there is no 
current requirement or guidance to specifically risk assess the overrun risk at 
buffer stops that are not located in station platforms.
Previous occurrences of a similar character 
87 RAIB has investigated a number of buffer stop collisions. Examples of these 
are Sudbury ( RAIB report 26/2006 ), Chester ( RAIB report 26/2014 ) and King’s 
Cross ( RAIB report 15/2016 ). RAIB has also published a safety digest into a 
second buffer stop collision at King’s Cross ( Safety digest 15/2017 ). However, 
the circumstances of this accident differ from those featured in previous 
investigations, and as a result none of the previously made recommendations are 
directly relevant here.
Analysis
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove26
November 2020Summary of conclusions 
Immediate cause 
88 The locomotive became foul of the main line shortly before the passenger service 
arrived (paragraph 44).
Causal factors 
89 The causal factors were:
a The locomotive derailed to a position foul of the main line (paragraph 47).  
This causal factor arose due to a combination of the following:
i The driver was distracted from the driving task as the locomotive entered 
the siding, resulting in the collision with the buffer stop (paragraph 49, 
Learning point 1 ).
ii The locomotive deviated to the left after collision with the buffer stop 
(paragraph 58, No Recommendation).
b There was no opportunity to stop the passenger train before the collision 
(paragraph 72, Learning points 2 and 3 ).  
Additional observation  
90 Although not linked to the accident on 23 March 2020, RAIB observes that:
a The standards and processes that Network Rail applies to assess the risk 
of overrun at buffer stops do not address those on non-platform tracks 
(paragraph 83, Recommendation 1 ).
Summary of conclusions 
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove27
November 2020Recommendation and learning points
Recommendation
91 The following recommendation is made:6
1 The intent of this recommendation is to improve the management of 
overrun risk at buffer stops that are not located in station platforms.  
 Network Rail should review, and revise if necessary, the processes and 
standards that it applies to buffer stops installed on non-platform terminal 
tracks, to ensure that the risks arising from potential buffer stop collisions 
are being adequately managed (paragraph 90).
 This recommendation may also be applicable to other infrastructure 
operators.
Learning points
92 This accident demonstrates the importance of:7
1 train drivers complying with their employer’s mobile phone usage policy 
so as to avoid unnecessary distractions while driving.
2 informing the signaller following a train accident, even before it is 
confirmed that adjacent lines are obstructed.
3 train drivers, and other staff, intending to get out of their trains following 
an incident ensuring that they do so in a manner that does not place 
them at unnecessary risk from trains on lines that are open to traffic.
6 Those identified in the recommendation have a general and ongoing obligation to comply with health and safety 
legislation, and need to take these recommendations into account in ensuring the safety of their employees and 
others.  
Additionally, for the purposes of regulation 12(1) of the Railways (Accident Investigation and Reporting) Regulations 
2005, this recommendation is addressed to the Office of Rail and Road to enable it to carry out its duties under 
regulation 12(2) to: 
(a) ensure that recommendations are duly considered and where appropriate acted upon; and 
(b) report back to RAIB details of any implementation measures, or the reasons why no implementation 
measures are being taken.
Copies of both the regulations and the accompanying guidance notes (paragraphs 200 to 203) can be found on 
RAIB’s website www.gov.uk/raib .
7 ‘Learning points’ are intended to disseminate safety learning that is not covered by a recommendation. They are 
included in a report when RAIB wishes to reinforce the importance of compliance with existing safety arrangements 
(where RAIB has not identified management issues that justify a recommendation) and the consequences of failing 
to do so. They also record good practice and actions already taken by industry bodies that may have a wider 
application.
Recommendations and learning points
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove28
November 2020Appendices
Appendix A - Glossary of abbreviations and acronyms 
CCTV Closed-circuit television
GSM-R Global System for Mobile Communications - Railway
OTDR On-train data recorder
RAIB Rail Accident Investigation Branch
REC Railway Emergency Group Call
TPWS Train Protection and Warning System
Appendices
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove29
November 2020Appendix B - Investigation details 
RAIB used the following sources of evidence in this investigation: 
l information provided by witnesses
l information taken from the train’s on-train data recorder (OTDR)
l closed-circuit television (CCTV) recordings taken from passing trains
l site photographs and measurements
l weather reports and observations at the site
l maintenance records relating to the locomotive and the infrastructure
l a review of relevant railway industry standards and procedures
l a review of previous RAIB investigations that had relevance to this accident.
Appendices
Report 14/2020
Bromsgrove30
November 2020This page is intentionally left blank
This report is published by the Rail Accident Investigation Branch, 
Department for Transport.
© Crown copyright 2020
Any enquiries about this publication should be sent to:
RAIB Email: enquiries@raib.gov.uk
The Wharf  Telephone: 01332 253300
Stores Road  Website: www.gov.uk/raib
Derby UK
DE21 4BA  